Making Migration Work for
Britain
For a stronger economy and a
fairer society
Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain

Contents
Introduction ........................................................................................ 4
1. Security and Firm Control ........................................................... 5
2. Growth and Prosperity ............................................................... 7
3. Compassion and Fairness ........................................................... 9
Student and Academic Migration ..................................................... 11
1.1

Why We Need to Take Action .......................................... 11

1.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions ............................................. 12

1.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals ................................... 12

Employment and Economic Migration ............................................. 16
2.1

Why We Need to Take Action .......................................... 16

2.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions ............................................. 17

2.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals ................................... 17

European Union Migration ............................................................... 22
3.1

A Positive Contribution to Britain ..................................... 22

3.2

Why We Need to Take Action .......................................... 23

3.3

Liberal Democrat Ambitions ............................................. 24

3.4

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals ................................... 24

Family Migration............................................................................... 26
4.1
2

Why We Need to Take Action .......................................... 26
Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
4.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions ............................................. 27

4.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals ................................... 27

Getting the Basics Right after UKBA ................................................. 32
5.1

Why We Need to Take Action .......................................... 32

5.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions ............................................. 33

5.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals ................................... 34

Overstayers....................................................................................... 39
6.1

Why We Need to Take Action .......................................... 39

6.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions ............................................. 40

6.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals ................................... 40

Asylum Seekers and Refugees .......................................................... 44
7.1

Why We Need to Take Action .......................................... 44

7.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions ............................................. 45

7.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals ................................... 46

Sticking Together – Identity and Social Cohesion ............................ 53
8.1

Why We Need to Take Action .......................................... 53

8.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions ............................................. 54

8.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals ................................... 55

Glossary ............................................................................................ 61
List of Policy Proposals ..................................................................... 64

Spring Conference 2014

3

Making Migration Work for Britain

Introduction
For hundreds of years migration has enriched our language,
culture and society, and driven innovation, productivity and
economic growth. It still does, but equally there have always been
tensions associated with migration, and there still are.
The general public has become increasingly sceptical about
government’s ability to control migration in a fair and balanced
way. That has been fuelled by repeated failings reported in the
border and migration control machinery, combined with
misreporting and exaggeration by some politicians, pressure
groups and sections of the press. In some polls the public now rate
immigration as the second most important issue affecting the UK
today (Ipsos Mori, Nov 2013). Faith in the system is at an all time
low, allowing misinformation and exaggeration to flourish.
However legitimate concerns do exist and we should be
encouraging healthy, transparent debate to tackle them head on.
Liberal Democrats’ highest priorities must therefore be to
rebuild trust in the migration control system, protect migrants
from scapegoating and put in place robust measures that can
give confidence to both the host community and those who
come here that their concerns are being heard and their
interests safeguarded.
The Coalition Government has taken some steps intended to
address public concerns, with significant tightening of the
immigration rules, the breakup and return of the UKBA to the
Home Office and the introduction of the net migration target.
While we support those sensible steps taken to control our
borders, in other areas policies have been illiberal and counter4

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
productive. As an example, the Net Migration Target of one
hundred thousand is an arbitrary figure that does not take account
of changing UK society and economic needs, and which hinges on
the numbers of UK citizens who decide to emigrate, or return, as
well as those coming from overseas - meaning the Government
has no practical control of the net figure and has been reduced to
juggling with damaging restrictions on categories of beneficial
migration instead.
The proposals in this paper are designed to control migration
properly and to make sure Britain is open to the benefits migration
continues to bring, with host communities given the support they
need to prosper as well.
We will make migration work for Britain to create a stronger
economy and a fairer society.
Our overarching themes are:
•

Security and firm control

•

Growth and prosperity

•

Compassion and fairness

1. Security and Firm Control
Take back control of our borders and put Parliament in charge
The public has lost trust in the security of our borders. Liberal
Democrats therefore believe that Parliament must take greater
direct responsibility for actively managing migration and showing
it is working in the interests of British people. We should also
Spring Conference 2014

5

Making Migration Work for Britain
ensure that evidence and argument, rather than emotion and
dogma, inform the public debate on immigration.
It should be for Parliament to decide and vote on what
measures are needed each year to assist in the delivery of the
plan. Parliament must be seen to be holding Government and
bureaucrats to account.
We propose that the Government should set out its proposed
migration plan annually to Parliament, alongside independent
advice from the Migration Advisory Committee, the Office for
Budget Responsibility and the Chief Inspector of Borders. We
would expect there to be a five year strategic migration plan with
annual opportunities to refine and extend it to take account of
new information in those reports. They would detail migration
flows, economic imperatives, including skills and labour market
shortfalls and surpluses, and set out how these are affecting the
economy, public services and local communities; together with an
annual audit of the control system itself. This would allow an
informed debate and provide strong accountability to the public
via Parliament. In turn, Government would be seen to be actively
managing migration in the interests of Britain as a whole.
The chapter Getting the Basics Right after UKBA has more details on
our accountability plans.
Counting them all in and counting them all out
For the last 20 years it has been impossible to be certain who was
here and who had left. A pressing priority for Liberal Democrats is
the creation of a border security system that works so we can get
to grips with overstayers and illegal immigrants.

6

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
Liberal Democrats propose to accelerate the delivery of full
monitoring of all UK border entry and exits, and will set aside
additional resources to speed up progress.
The chapter Getting the Basics Right after UKBA has more details.

2. Growth and Prosperity
Open for business and growth
We must serve Britain’s interests by ensuring that those who
help to boost our economy are encouraged to come here.
Foreign students contribute nearly £13 billion to our economy
each year, and the skills they bring and the fees they contribute
play a key role in keeping our higher education institutions
amongst the best in the world. Once they have come and paid in,
the vast majority of foreign students return home. We should aim
to increase the number of foreign students studying in the UK, not
deter them with a migration target.
Britain needs more foreign students to come. The Student
Migration chapter gives details.
Professional and business experts are needed to plug the gaps
in UK skills. The control system must enable investors and top
quality recruits to join UK-based enterprises. We want to see
major employers of foreign workers investing in the UK skills
base, too. The Economic Migration chapter explains what we plan.
We should say ‘yes’ to doctors, experts and investors coming
to help Britain grow.
Spring Conference 2014

7

Making Migration Work for Britain
Speeding up the Visa System. For students, short term business
visitors and tourists, the speed with which visa applications are
dealt with has a crucial bearing on their decision about coming to
the UK, and hence our receipt of their custom. We propose
quicker decisions, right first time and fairer for all, that will
help block ‘Overstayers’ and keep out crooks and cheats who
would harm Britain.
For legitimate visitors and migrants we propose a better
service at no extra cost to the taxpayer.
Our full proposals are set out in the Getting the Basics Right after
UKBA chapter.
Making EU migration work for Britain
Liberal Democrats have long championed the benefits of the
European Union and the free movement of labour, which is
essential to the functioning of the Single Market. We recognise
that now the EU needs to be ready for the challenges it faces in the
21st Century, in particular those that come with the free movement
of labour in the European Economic Area (EEA). We plan to work
with our European partners to drive the reforms needed so that
migration can be managed intelligently.
We propose to work with our European partners to agree
appropriate and effective transition controls for countries
entering the European Union in future.
In the shorter term it is also right that we take a sensible approach
to burdens that might be put on our benefits system and protect
British workers from any ill effects on wages.

8

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
We propose a 6 month waiting time for EU migrants to claim
out of work benefits.
Our EU Migration chapter sets out how we will work across the EU
to achieve these aims.
Of course we remain strongly the only ‘party of in’ the European
Union and champions of the clear economic benefits it brings.

3. Compassion and Fairness
Speaking the same language
It must be good from every viewpoint for all long-term
residents in the UK to have good English skills, and we aim to
facilitate that being achieved within the next generation,
starting now.
We set out in the Identity & Social Cohesion chapter a strong
package of measures to encourage migrants to learn English, and
to help them find their feet and play their part in Britain.
Help for hosts
If migration is going to work for Britain it must work for British
people, too. So our proposals are designed to help host
communities facing pressure on their public services and jobs.
We plan to double the number of Minimum Wage checks on
firms to stop undercutting of wages and exploitation of workers.
And we will set up a £1 billion Community Protection Fund,

Spring Conference 2014

9

Making Migration Work for Britain
using the European Social Fund, to relieve pressure on local
housing, schools and healthcare created by rapid migrant flows.
There is more detail in the Identity & Social Cohesion chapter.
Refugees and seekers of sanctuary should also be treated
humanely, kept from destitution, and expected to make their
own contribution to Britain if there are delays in settling their
claim.
We will end Indefinite Detention, and show how this will cut costs
as well as help families in the Asylum and Refugees chapter.
In the rest of this paper we set out a package of proposals covering
each aspect of the migration flows into the UK, including family
migration, all aimed at building a fully functioning control system
that gives public confidence in the outcomes, with full
Parliamentary oversight, and which treats those who seek to come
to the UK for whatever reason with dignity, humanity and respect
at every stage of their journey through it.

10

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain

Student and Academic Migration
1.1

Why We Need to Take Action

1.1.1
Higher Education is one of our most successful export
markets. Students travelling to the United Kingdom were worth an
estimated £13 billion in 2012, expected to rise to £16 billion over
the next 5 years. International students build long term
professional links with UK organisations, helping our businesses
trade in future. They directly benefit our higher education
institutions, and the fees they pay help fund the education of
British students, and keep our universities amongst the best in the
world 1.
1.1.2
Those benefits for host countries provoke fierce
international competition for overseas students. According to the
Russell Group the UK is the 2nd most popular destination in the
world for international first degree and PhD students, behind the
USA. Clearly we should aim to grow and not harm such a valuable
export market. Yet some aspects of current policy, in particular the
net migration target, which includes international students, have
caused needless damage. The number of students coming to the
UK from outside the EEA fell in 2011, for the first time since 2008 2.
This reduction has denied our economy the clear benefits
international students bring.

1 The Russell group report that due to insignificant demand many courses
wouldn’t be available for British students without the fees contributed by foreign
students.
2 Based on passenger entry data, Migration Observatory briefing – student
migration.

Spring Conference 2014

11

Making Migration Work for Britain
1.1.3
Britain should encourage more bona fide students to
come; however legitimate concerns about abuses of the student
migration route do exist. They include the role of bogus and
unaccredited colleges, and overstayers who fail to comply with
visa conditions after study. The Government has taken steps to
clamp down on these abuses, but there is more to do.

1.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions

1.2.1
Liberal Democrats want Britain to be open for business,
so we want to see more genuine international students come to
the UK. Britain should be welcoming those who choose UK
universities rather than our international competitors, and we
should be protecting, maintaining and promoting the world class
reputations of our universities. It is also right that we clamp down
further on those who would abuse the student migration system.

1.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals

1.3.1

Increasing the number of international
students

Taking students out of the net migration target
1.3.1.1 Students differ from other non-EEA economic migrants;
they are issued only temporary visas which do not provide a route
to permanent residency in the UK. The Migration Observatory
reports that of those international students who entered in 2006,
82% no longer remained by 2009.
1.3.1.2 Irrespective of the future of any Net Migration Target, it
makes no economic or social sense to limit the flow of
international students to the UK. Liberal Democrats propose,
12

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
therefore, that students should be taken out of any future net
migration target 3.
Post study work
1.3.1.3 In recognition of the importance of the UK remaining
competitive as a destination for foreign students, Learning for Life
(Policy Paper 110, Autumn 2013 Conference) proposed to allow
foreign graduates from UK universities to stay on in the UK for a
further three years. This paper supports this but recognises that
the labour market for young people is already overcrowded, with
well documented problems around graduate unemployment. It is
therefore important that foreign graduates permitted to stay and
take jobs are meeting a demand for skills which are not available in
the UK labour market. So permission to stay should be linked to UK
skill shortages.
1.3.1.4 At present our higher education system does not
produce the numbers of Science, Technology, Engineering, Maths
(STEM) skills our economy needs. The CBI found that two in five of
UK businesses report current difficulties with the level of STEM
skills their staff possess.
1.3.1.5 Therefore, Liberal Democrats propose that only
international graduates of UK universities in these subjects will be
permitted to work for three years in the UK. This would be conditional
on securing graduate-level work within 6 months of completing their
course.

3

Due to the international definition of migration, figures would be published
both with and without students included.

Spring Conference 2014

13

Making Migration Work for Britain
1.3.1.6 We would extend this policy more widely subsequently,
once the monitoring system has been proven, and where the
impact on the UK labour market still remains beneficial. We will ask
the Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) to advise on this in their
annual reports to Parliament (see the Making Migration Work
chapter).
1.3.1.7 Alongside this it will be important to make progress on
filling the UK skills gap. Liberal Democrat policy paper Learning for
Life contains Liberal Democrat policies to do this.
1.3.2

Preventing abuse

1.3.2.1 We recognise that much has been done already to deal
with abuses of the student visa route and that most universities
and international students consistently comply with the rules.
Nonetheless, further and more effective safeguards can be put in
place to ensure that any abuses don’t reoccur.
Student & College Compliance and Liaison Team
1.3.2.2 More support is needed to help students and colleges
follow immigration rules, but this must be coupled with effective
action to tackle those who don’t.
1.3.2.3 Liberal Democrats propose to establish a Student & College
Compliance & Liaison Team to ensure that educational institutions
and international students are complying with the rules placed upon
them.
1.3.2.4 The Team would be established within the Home Office,
and would:

14

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
•

Issue warnings to non-compliant universities and
students and take enforcement action when necessary.

•

Publish the current status of each educational institution,
and details of any warnings issued, to help overseas
students decide on where to pursue their studies.

•

Provide additional support to educational institutions in
monitoring the whereabouts of their graduates in their
post-study years of work in the UK and advise them on
what measures can be put in place to proactively resolve
problems.

•

Submit an annual report to Government on performance,
and recommend any action needed to ensure
compliance in the student migration system. (This will
feed into the annual Parliamentary Oversight of
Immigration; see the Making Migration Work chapter).

Highly Trusted Status
1.3.2.5 Currently, in order to enrol international students higher
educational institutions must apply annually to the Home Office
for Highly Trusted Status (HTS). With better support and
enforcement provided by the Student & College Compliance &
Liaison Team the authorities will be able to focus on those
institutions most likely to break the rules.
1.3.2.6 Therefore, Liberal Democrats propose that fully compliant
educational institutions will benefit from automatic renewal of their
‘Highly Trusted Status’ for three years.

Spring Conference 2014

15

Making Migration Work for Britain

Employment and Economic
Migration
2.1

Why We Need to Take Action

2.1.1
Economic migration is vital to building a stronger
economy. The Office of Budget Responsibility estimated that a net
migration rate of 250,000 per year boosts annual GDP by 0.5% and
that if net migration were to stop tomorrow the UK's net public
sector debt would rise by £18bn in five years. Furthermore,
economic migration is essential to delivery of public services.
There are 40,000 foreign-born doctors in the NHS and over 6,000
foreign teachers received qualified teacher status over the last five
years.
2.1.2
Accepting the benefits of economic migration does not
mean being blind to public concerns. With UK unemployment at
over 2 million 4 some fear that migrants come here at the expense
of jobs for British citizens; and there are worries that low-skilled
migrants are willing to work for less than the minimum wage,
leaving local workers at a disadvantage 5. This is unfair for British
citizens and it is unacceptable exploitation of migrant workers.
2.1.3
In addition migration can impose real burdens locally
caused by increased pressure on housing, schools and the NHS in
areas with substantial migrant communities. Proposals to support
public services under pressure from inward migration are set out
in the Social Cohesion and Identity chapter.
4 ONS Labour market statistics, December 2013.
5 Migration & Productivity: employers’ practices, public attitudes and statistical
evidence, NIESR, Nov 2013.

16

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain

2.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions

2.2.1
Immigration policy should bolster economic growth
whilst reassuring British nationals that the system is fair for them.
Our economic migration proposals need to strike the right balance
to achieve both a stronger economy and a fairer society.

2.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals

2.3.1

Fairness for British Citizens

Pay all workers the going rate
2.3.1.1 If economic migrants are to be employed it should be to
fill a skills or manpower gap, and not to undercut the wages of
British citizens or exploit those who would work at below the
minimum wage. The policy measures in place to prohibit the
undercutting of wages in the employment of non-EEA migrants
still leave challenges, in particular related to non-EEA migrant
workers who are not subject to Standard Occupation Code checks.
We must ensure that employers pay them at least the minimum
wage and that their statutory employment rights are respected. To
this end we welcome the Coalition Government’s steep increase in
fines on non-compliant employers.
2.3.1.2 However, Liberal Democrats propose to clamp down on this
abuse further by doubling the number of inspections on employers to
ensure that their workforce is being paid at least the national
minimum wage, and that all statutory employment legislation is
being honoured.

Spring Conference 2014

17

Making Migration Work for Britain
The skills gap – Training up Britain
2.3.1.3 Investment in UK skills is critically needed, both in its own
right, and to ensure that economic migration complements, rather
than replaces, British workers. The UK workforce is particularly
lacking in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) skills and there are more general skill shortages 6. As the
Social Market Foundation reports 7, these will not be filled by the
UK labour market for the foreseeable future.
2.3.1.4 In starting to deal with this problem skilled migrants
coming to the UK and the companies that employ them should
give something back to the UK workforce. A recent report by NIESR
showed how UK-born employees have benefitted from working
with migrants.
2.3.1.5 So Liberal Democrats propose ‘Training up Britain’, a
mentoring scheme aimed at using highly skilled migrants to develop
the skills of the British workforce.
2.3.1.6 Training up Britain (TuB) will be a recognised
accreditation for the development of skills for UK graduates and
apprentices by working alongside highly skilled migrant workers.
The scheme would be voluntary and any business that participates
would be given the ‘Training up Britain’ award, signifying to all
that their company is investing in the future of Britain. We would
convene an employment commission to establish a TuB
certification. Accredited companies would be required to publish
6

Migration & Productivity: employers’ practices, public attitudes and statistical
evidence, NIESR, Nov 2013 and Changing the Pace, CBI/Pearson Education & Skills
Survey 2013; CBI, June 2013.
7
In the Balance; the STEM human capital crunch; Social Market Foundation; March
2013.

18

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
their graduate/apprenticeship programmes and be available for
inspection by an independent authority.
Preventing benefit misuse
2.3.1.7 A major public concern is that migrants come to the UK
purposely to misuse the benefits system which, as a consequence,
adds an extra burden onto the UK taxpayer. Whilst overall
migrants put in more tax than they take out in benefits and public
services 8, there are areas in the system that could, and should, be
tightened up. We propose the following measures.
Extend the period EU Citizens have to wait before claiming UK benefits
2.3.1.8 As it stands, EU law guarantees that unemployed citizens
who go and look for a job in another EU country will continue to
receive unemployment benefits from their home country for a
period of three months while they look for work. The EU
Commission has proposed that this period can be extended to six
months9. This would save UK taxpayers from footing benefit bills
for an EEA citizen for a further three months than is currently the
case.
2.3.1.9 Liberal Democrats support the EU Commission’s proposal to
extend this period to 6 months.
Strengthen the Habitual Residence Test

8 The Fiscal Effects of Immigration to the UK; CReAM; November 2013.
9 EU Citizenship Report; EU commission May 2013 COM(2013) 269.

Spring Conference 2014

19

Making Migration Work for Britain
2.3.1.10 As it stands, if an EU citizen decides to stay on in the UK
after the permitted period of 3 months and wishes to claim certain
means-tested benefits they must pass a ‘Habitual Residence Test’.
If they pass this test then they are eligible to claim noncontributory benefits with equal rights to British citizens.
2.3.1.11 Liberal Democrats support Coalition Government measures
to strengthen the Habitual Residence Test by increasing the range and
depth of evidence collected from claimants to improve decision
making.
2.3.1.12 This measure came into force on 1 January 2014.

2.3.2

Strengthening our economy

2.3.2.1 To achieve a stronger economy we need to be open for
business - attracting the skilled economic migrants that help
create jobs. Our support for the free movement of labour within
the EU is a huge part of this, but there is more we can do to
encourage the best non-EEA migrants to come to the UK. In
addition, we need to ensure the British workforce benefits from
the skills and experience migrants bring to the country.
Business and study visa
2.3.2.2 At present no-one may hold two types of entry visa at
any one time, this precludes holding a business visitor visa and a
short term study visa. Many business visitors wish to study while in
the UK, and the current situation prevents them from doing so. As
a result we miss out on a further channel of income and business
visitors are prevented from creating further ties with the UK.

20

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
2.3.2.3 Liberal Democrats propose a new entry permit available
only for those already having a business visitor visa who also want to
study whilst in the UK.
2.3.2.4 This will allow business visitors to apply for a short term
study permit, as an endorsement on their original visa, so they can
study in the UK whilst on a business visit without committing an
immigration offence.

Spring Conference 2014

21

Making Migration Work for Britain

European Union Migration
3.1

A Positive Contribution to Britain

3.1.1
Liberal Democrats have long championed the benefits of
the European Union and of the European single market. The party
re-affirmed its commitment to this at its Federal Conference in
September 2013.
3.1.2
The Single Market, and the free movement of labour, is
good for the UK economy. There is evidence that EU migrants are
filling skills shortages in both professional and elementary
occupations (CEBR, 2013) – in sharp contrast to the often-peddled
image of UK workers and the economy overall losing out to EU
migrants. A drop of 2% in the UK GDP by mid-century is projected
were the UK to exit the Single Market (CEBR 2013). Today, some
three million UK jobs are linked to the EU and the single market.
3.1.3
The CEBR study 10 shows that EU migration is producing a
net increase in productivity, and a net dividend to the public
finances (tax receipts against expenditure). It also projects that
economic growth will be higher with ready access to non-UK EU
migrants than without; public sector borrowing will be lower, and
EU migration will contribute to UK pensions and welfare
payments.
3.1.4
The SMF 11 estimates that the UK’s demand for STEM skills,
already with a gap of around 30,000 UK graduates per year, will
10

‘The Impact of the European Union on the UK Labour Market’; CEBR; August
2013.
11
In the Balance; the STEM human capital crunch; Social Market Foundation;
March 2013.

22

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
increase, especially given Government policy on diversifying the
UK economy. Whilst measures are in place to increase the UK skills
base, there is no doubt that EU migrants will be required to fill that
gap on a large scale for the foreseeable future.
3.1.5
We are therefore clear that the Single Labour Market
remains in the UK’s practical interest, and plays an important part
in helping us build a stronger, sustainable (not boom and bust)
economy.
3.1.6
In addition the EU labour market is a ‘two way street’.
Millions of UK citizens individually benefit from free labour
movement, and at least 1.4 million UK citizens live elsewhere in the
EU at present.

3.2

Why We Need to Take Action

3.2.1
While the positive case is clear, the EU has of course
changed in the two decades since free labour movement began.
With 1.6 million EEA citizens in work in the UK (June ’13) 12,
concerns understandably exist about the likely effect on local
communities and their services. We have to manage these
pressures in an EEA that has expanded to include countries with
diverse economies. Liberal Democrats recognise that concern over
that migration is one of the barriers to popular support for the UK’s
continued membership of the EU, and must be addressed.

12 ‘The Impact of the European Union on the UK Labour Market’; CEBR; August
2013.

Spring Conference 2014

23

Making Migration Work for Britain

3.3

Liberal Democrat Ambitions

3.3.1
Liberal Democrats believe the European Union will need
renewal and reform to meet the challenges of the 21st Century. It is
right that we take a pro-active, sensible approach to potential
burdens on the public purse, as some of our European Partners
have already done.

3.4

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals

Preventing abuse
3.4.1
The Economic Migration chapter of this paper sets out
steps to prevent abuse of our benefits system and public services
due to migration. By extending the period EU citizens have to
wait before claiming UK benefits and by strengthening the
habitual residence test we can begin to reassure the public
that the free movement of labour is the right course for the UK
and for their own personal well being.
Promoting social cohesion
3.4.2
The Identity and Social Cohesion chapter of this paper
outlines our ambition for the UK to be one society with many
cultures. It sets out measures to encourage migrants to learn
English, to ease the pressure of migration on public services
and to support local-based initiatives that bring individuals
and communities together.

24

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
Tackling Human Trafficking
3.4.3
Although human trafficking is by no means limited to EU
citizens, it is a problem best tackled at international and EU level. It
is essential to develop stronger links with Frontex and the
European Border Management system. The partnership academy
based in the UK already facilitates co-operation and aims to instil
shared values and works to raise the standard of borderguardianship across the EU. By strengthening other countries’
ability to control and monitor their own external borders we
protect ourselves.
3.4.4
We recognise the high value of other EU instruments
such as Europol and Eurodac in tackling international criminals
and illegal migration into the UK, and repudiate attempts to
withdraw from them.
Transitional controls
3.4.5
We plan to work with our European partners to drive the
reforms needed to harmonise entitlements for migrants across the
EU. As we do so we should learn from the experience of the entry
of A8 countries into the EEA in 2004. While it is clear that these
migrants contributed significantly to the UK economy, the increase
in EEA migration does underline the need for member states to
have better control of their borders, so that migration can be
managed intelligently.
3.4.6
Liberal Democrats propose to work with our European
partners to develop more effective and appropriate transitional
controls for countries entering the EU in future, and to harmonise EU
migrant welfare support rights.

Spring Conference 2014

25

Making Migration Work for Britain

Family Migration
4.1

Why We Need to Take Action

4.1.1
There are a variety of forms of family migration into the
UK. People who have gained permission to work or study in the UK
may seek to bring spouses and family members with them. First
generation established migrants might seek permanence and wish
to bring parents or other family members to join them. Some
people from long established minority communities look to their
country of origin for spouses. A British citizen may have married a
non-EU partner and want their spouse and family to live with them
in the UK.
4.1.2
Family migration has fallen steadily since 2007 following
successive steps to tighten the Immigration Rules. These steps
responded to concerns about pressures on local schools, housing
and healthcare and on community cohesion. One area of concern
by hosts and migrants alike is the importance of having the English
language skills required to play their full part in local communities.
This has to be a high priority, as well.
4.1.3
However the tighter rules have restricted the ability of
some British citizens to live in the UK with their partner and
families and created important areas of friction for migrant
communities. They are affected by family separation, of husbands
and wives, and from elderly parents living in their home countries.
Recent changes to the Immigration Rules including the increased
financial thresholds for the granting of ‘leave to remain’ have put
historic expectations of reunion out of reach. There is also the
significant issue of short-term visits for holidays and family events
some, such as funerals, occurring at very short notice that the visa
26

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
system can frustrate. It is important to address those legitimate
concerns.

4.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions

4.2.1
Liberal Democrats believe that any policy on family
migration must be designed to achieve a humane balance
between the concerns of both migrants and the communities they
wish to join.

4.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals

Are we all speaking the same language?
4.3.1
A key to acceptance and participation in society is
language, and our proposals in the Social Cohesion and Identity
chapter set out our aim to have every long-term migrant become a
fluent English speaker.
Financial threshold for family reunion
4.3.2
The July 2012 immigration rules changes set an increased
minimum income level of £18,600 to bring a partner to the UK or
£22,400 to bring a partner and a child. This level was chosen as the
one at which a couple would no longer be eligible for income
support in the UK, on the advice of the Migration Advisory
Committee. Liberal Democrats believe that it is right that those
seeking to bring their partners to the UK should have the financial
means to support them and that UK tax payers should not be
asked to bear this burden.
4.3.3
However the current rule means that many residents in
full time employment at, or above, the minimum wage have been
Spring Conference 2014

27

Making Migration Work for Britain
unable to bring their partner or children to the UK. It sets a
standard that 47% of the UK population would fail to meet, and
has even caused children to be separated from their parents.
4.3.4
For these reasons we agree with the recommendation of
the All Party Parliamentary Group on Migration that this income
level should be re-examined.
4.3.5
Liberal Democrats propose to ask the Migration Advisory
Committee to reconsider the minimum income threshold for a spouse
to come to the UK in light of the principle that a person with the
means to support their family should be allowed to do so.
4.3.6
Any changes to this income threshold must continue to
be fair to the tax payer, and we would maintain the rule that
partners coming to the UK would have no recourse to public funds
for the first five years of settlement.
4.3.7
However at present any offer of employment the partner
may have in the UK, any likely employment, or their earnings in
their home country is completely discounted. In previous advice to
the Government the MAC reported that it would be
understandable if these factors were allowed to be considered. In
the context of our proposed reforms to the entire visa handling
system, outlined in the Getting the Basics Right chapter, we believe
that such a discretionary power should be given to the decisionmaker.
4.3.8
Liberal Democrats would invite the MAC to give further
advice on allowing immigration officers discretion over spouses
entering the UK based on any offer of employment, likely employment
or their earnings in their home country.
Dependent elderly relatives
28

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain

4.3.9
Prior to July 2012 rules were in place ensuring that
migrants entering the UK as elderly dependent relatives were
maintained and accommodated without recourse to public funds.
The number of migrants entering via this route was relatively low.
Less than 2,000 entered in 2012, and this number has been falling
steadily since 2007.
4.3.10 The changes made to the Immigration Rules in July 2012
went further, requiring dependent relatives to demonstrate that
“as a result of age, illness or disability they require long term care to
perform everyday tasks and are unable even with the practical and
financial help of a sponsor to obtain a required level of care within the
country they are living”. As a result of this change only one visa was
issued via this route between July and October 2012. Liberal
Democrats believe it is right that migrants bringing elderly
relatives to the country should be able to maintain and
accommodate them without recourse to public funds. However
the Immigration Rules must be fair and reasonable and not simply
written to exclude all applicants.
4.3.11 Liberal Democrats propose that migrants bringing elderly
relatives to the country should be allowed to do so where they are able
to maintain and accommodate them without recourse to public
funds.
4.3.12 This means that alongside simpler entry rules it is
essential to put in place safeguards to ensure that any burden on
public funds is limited and proportionate. Elderly dependants
coming to the UK are likely to need a significant degree of health
and community care.

Spring Conference 2014

29

Making Migration Work for Britain
4.3.13 For this reason Liberal Democrats propose that sponsors of
elderly dependants, over the age of state retirement, should pay a
health levy before their dependants are allowed to settle in the UK.
4.3.14 The levy would be based on an actuarial assessment, and
it is expected that this will necessarily be a large sum, likely to
deter those without substantial means.
Short-stay family visitors
4.3.15 There is significant hardship caused to many migrant
families by the inflexible and slow-moving process of visahandling by UKBA when traumatic family events occur. Whilst it is
clear that there is a legitimate concern to address about attempted
abuse, which makes diligence essential, we are persuaded that real
improvements in accuracy and sensitivity are possible. Our further
changes to the visa-handling system are set out in the Getting the
Basics Right chapter.
Grandparents’ ‘super visa’
4.3.16 Our current system does not allow foreign grandparents
to visit their families for an extended period. Countries such as
Canada have introduced an extended tourist visa for these
circumstances. Allowing elderly relatives who can be adequately
supported to visit enables them to spend time with their families,
and makes Britain a more attractive place to settle for those highly
skilled and wealthy migrants who benefit our economy.
4.3.17 Liberal Democrats propose the introduction of a
‘grandparents’ super visa’ that would allow grandparents to visit for a
period of up to two years on condition of an actuarially-calculated
health levy.
30

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain

Nationality of children born to unmarried British fathers
4.3.18 Liberal Democrats believe that immigration laws should
be fair and non-discriminatory. Since 1 January 1983, unmarried
mothers have been able to pass on their British nationality to
children born outside the UK. However unmarried fathers were not
able to do so until a change in the law came into force from 1 July
2006. This change did not apply retrospectively, so children born
to an unmarried British father before July 2006 did not
automatically benefit. To ensure fairness, those children should
also be allowed to claim British nationality.
4.3.19 Liberal Democrats propose that children of unmarried
British fathers born before July 2006 and of unmarried British mothers
born before January 1983 should be allowed to claim British
Citizenship by descent, subject to providing sufficient proof of
parentage.

Spring Conference 2014

31

Making Migration Work for Britain

Getting the Basics Right after
UKBA
5.1

Why We Need to Take Action

5.1.1
There are over 100 million entries and exits from the UK
each year. Over five million visa applications are made, with
around 600,000 for visitors intending to stay longer than 12
months considered ‘migrants’.
5.1.2
It is vital the public have confidence in the way these
huge flows are monitored and managed. That has been
comprehensively lost. Following sustained criticism of the United
Kingdom Borders Agency (UKBA), not least by the Home Affairs
Select Committee, in March 2013 the Home Secretary replaced it
with three separate directorates within the Home Office, one
dealing with visas and immigration, the second law enforcement,
and the third “Border Force” policing the flow of people and goods
at ports.
5.1.3
The closure of UKBA provides an opportunity for a
completely fresh approach to the mechanics of the system and,
most importantly, to restore proper accountability within our
Parliamentary democracy for policy-making and delivery of
migration control.
5.1.4
The Home Affairs Select Committee found that UKBA had
a backlog of 430,000 applications. They had failed to deport more
than 600 of the 1,013 foreign prisoners released without being
considered for deportation between 1999 and 2006. And their
action to tackle the ‘overstayers’ issue was said to be almost
32

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
completely ineffective. Perhaps worst, they deliberately obscured
their failure behind complex administrative processes.
5.1.5
Decision making on asylum cases was particularly poor
with a 63% rise in 2012 in the number of asylum seekers awaiting
initial decisions for more than six months 13. However delays are
endemic throughout the entire entry application system. With the
huge scale of travel to the UK each year, simply catching up is not
sufficient. Better decision-making involves accuracy as well as
speed. Success rates in appeals against refusals have risen to
nearly 30% 14.
5.1.6
One vital missing link is the accurate tracking of who is
entering and leaving the UK. Exit checks were ended during the
1990s, and the Coalition Government has a target of 2015 for their
restoration using technology-based methods and the e-Borders
programme. The Chief Inspector of Borders has stated that full
monitoring of entry and exits is now unlikely to be achieved before
2018, if then.

5.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions

5.2.1
A priority for Liberal Democrats is to create a border
security system that makes well-informed and appropriate
decisions taken as early as possible; with people treated with
humanity and dignity; and where the rule of law is upheld. Any
new system must do more to ensure Britain is open to the benefits
of migration, while remaining secure from those who would abuse
the system.
13 Home Affairs Committee; ‘The work of the UK Border Agency (January-March
2013)’; November 2013.
14 Migration to the UK: Asylum; Migration Observatory, February 2013.

Spring Conference 2014

33

Making Migration Work for Britain
5.2.2
Liberal Democrats have long led the way in calling for the
full reintroduction of entry and exit checks, and the full
implementation of the e-Borders system will continue to be a high
priority.
5.2.3
To meet these challenges the new visa service must find
an organisational structure that can get to grips with the ever
increasing backlog of cases, improve current decision-making and
install a functioning system of reporting and accountability,
including the implementation of e-Borders. Only with this
achieved will we have a border system in which Parliament and
the general public can have confidence.
5.2.4
In making these changes we recognise the need for cost
effectiveness. In 2012 -2013 UKBA spent £1.6bn 15. Additionally,
Border Force’s total spend was £600m 16. Taken together £2.2bn in
expenditure was offset by £930m from fees, the remainder
(£600m) was covered by taxpayers’ money. Given the current fiscal
climate, our aim is for the changes we propose to have no
additional recourse to public funds.

5.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals

Entry and exit checks, e -Borders
5.3.1
The e -Borders project has encountered serious, and well
documented, problems since its introduction in 2007. E-borders
still only captures 65% of passenger data 17, largely down to
difficulties with implementation for rail and maritime passengers.
15 UKBA Annual Report & Accounts 2012-13.
16 National Audit Office; The Border Force: securing the border; August 2013.
17 Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration, ‘Exporting the
Border?’ An inspection of e-Borders October 2013 - March 2013, September 2013.

34

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
At these ports, e-borders alone do not achieve full entry and exit
checks and needs to be combined with existing outbound
passenger procedures to do so.
5.3.2
While we need to recognise these hurdles and be realistic
about delivery, it is vital that the number of migrants entering and
leaving is recorded so that we can have proper control of
immigration and tackle the problem of overstayers. For this reason
the delivery of full monitoring of entry and exit checks must
continue to be the highest priority, together with increasingly
rigorous action by Border Force of inspection of goods and freight.
5.3.3
Liberal Democrats propose to accelerate the delivery of full
monitoring of all UK border entry and exits, and will set aside
additional resources if necessary to speed up progress.
Clear and strong accountability
5.3.4
The UKBA was left to fail for too long. It is important that
measures are put in place to ensure that system wide problems are
identified and acted on much earlier.
5.3.5
Liberal Democrats propose to retain UKBA’s successor
functions within the Home Office, with the Home Secretary
maintaining accountability to Parliament for both its successes and
failures.
5.3.6
Proper external scrutiny and inspection is also needed.
The Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration has conducted a
number of reviews and produced constructive recommendations
for improvement, but the changes needed to make UKBA’s
successor fit for purpose have not followed. For the accountability

Spring Conference 2014

35

Making Migration Work for Britain
system to work the Inspector needs powers to scrutinise delivery
of his recommendations.
5.3.7
Liberal Democrats propose that the Chief Inspector of
Borders and Immigration makes an Annual Report directly to
Parliament as part of its annual oversight and consideration of
immigration policy. Further details of our proposals on accountability
are set out in the Making Migration Work chapter.
5.3.8
The functioning of our borders has implications across
Government, so those making policy on wider public services and
the economy should have a say in its objectives. In particular there
is a need to ensure that the perspectives of business and local
communities are strongly represented.
5.3.9
To achieve this Liberal Democrats propose that senior
representatives from the Department for Business, Innovations and
Skills, and of local government across the UK should sit on the UKBA
successor’s Oversight Board in the Home Office, and that they, in
turn, should ensure that the views of business and local
communities are properly reflected in the judgements they bring
to bear on its work.
Speed of decisions
5.3.10 UKBA’s record of processing cases within their own
deadlines was poor, and delays in processing applications are
severe. The speed of in-country applications has lagged well
behind those made from abroad. The new visa service needs to
tackle this problem. The development of the premium face to face
visa application service has shown how that can be done. At the
newly- established PEO in Croydon a two-hour while-you-wait visa
application service runs efficiently with its costs more than
36

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
covered by modest fees. It is in marked contrast to the postal
application service housed nearby.
5.3.11 Liberal Democrats propose the accelerated roll out of face to
face visa processing based on the successful PEO model, with the
ambition that all visas applied for within the UK are processed in this
way by the end of the next Parliament.
Reforming borders administration
5.3.12 While administrative problems within the UKBA’s
successor are extensive, and it will take time and investment to put
them right, there are clear measures that we know will make a real
difference.
Quality of decisions
5.3.13 Visa application decisions are complex. Crucial to
improvement is the quality of senior management. Border officials
must apply detailed rules which are subject to frequent change,
while making high stake judgments on both visa and asylum
applications. In improving the quality of decisions it is important
that we equip operational staff to meet these challenges, and to
recognise the role of ‘immigration officer’ as a skilled profession.
Immigration officers are recruited at an administrative grade, the
requirements for which do not ensure they are equipped with the
skills needed for the role.
5.3.14 Liberal Democrats propose the UKBA’s successor should set
the ambition that all immigration officers processing visa or asylum
applications should be of an Executive Officer grade by 2020 with
commensurate levels of skills and sensitivity.

Spring Conference 2014

37

Making Migration Work for Britain
5.3.15 In improving decision making a greater focus should also
be given to the training available to immigration officers.
5.3.16 Liberal Democrats propose the Home Office should develop
an accredited training and CPD programme for immigration officers,
addressing their need for language skills for visa applications,
understanding of cultural differences and giving them an increased
ability to identify fraudulent applications accurately.
5.3.17 These skills can be particularly important when dealing
with complex asylum cases. There needs to be urgent attention to
improving the quality of management and leadership.
5.3.18 With its accountability for the visa service retained the
Home Office should be directly responsible for the quality of
individual visa decisions. At present appeals against visa decisions
are funded by the Ministry of Justice, providing a weak incentive
for the Home Office to drive up the quality of decision making
within UKBA’s successor.
5.3.19 Liberal Democrats propose the Home Office is made
responsible for the costs of immigration and asylum appeals, however
the appellant will still be expected to cover his/her own costs.

38

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain

Overstayers
6.1

Why We Need to Take Action

6.1.1
It has been estimated that around 620,000 people have
entered the United Kingdom lawfully, and then remained longer
than they were legally entitled to 18, in addition to those who
evaded entry controls in the first place. There are a wide variety of
circumstances leading to a person overstaying. However, there is
one common factor – none of them have a right to be here and
they should be expected to regularise their status or leave.
6.1.2
The opportunity to overstay has been increased by the
woeful failure of previous governments to keep tabs on people’s
whereabouts and the extraordinary inability of UKBA and its
predecessors to manage the visa process. The longer a person
overstays the more complex their life and relationships will
become and the greater the challenge and cost of their removal,
so ending the flow of new overstayers is as important as reducing
the ‘stock’.
6.1.3
Recent attempts by Ministers to create a hostile
environment for existing overstayers, via measures such as ‘Go
home vans’, have proved ineffective at best. They completely miss
the main targets related to overstaying - criminal gangs, those
who operate in the black market, and those who are trafficking or
exploiting irregular migrants.

18 Economic impact on the London and UK economy of an earned regularisation of
irregular migrants to the UK (LSE/GLA 2009)

Spring Conference 2014

39

Making Migration Work for Britain
6.1.4
There is also the politically sensitive issue of when or if
those who have been in the UK illegally for years should have any
route to regularisation open to them. Legislation in this area must
tread the narrow line between treating vulnerable people fairly,
and sending a message that those who break the rules can benefit.

6.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions

6.2.1
Liberal Democrats aim for a system which makes it worth
your while to live legitimately in the UK and which better identifies
those purposely avoiding the authorities, so we can clamp down
appropriately on them. The implementation of exit checks is a
vital first step to achieve this, and is our number one priority.
Our proposals in the chapter Getting the Basics Right address the
issues in more detail.
6.2.2
We also need a system that is fair to those for whom a
route to regularisation might be justified, but we must not send
out a message that those who break the rules can prosper. Liberal
Democrats particularly aim to address the circumstances of
children, who often are illegally resident in the UK through no fault
of their own.

6.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals

6.3.1

Enforcement and removals

6.3.1.1 Knowing who has entered and left the UK is a precondition for deterring and challenging new overstayers promptly.
That in turn is the key to achieving prompt, low cost, and humane
removals. Liberal Democrats propose an accelerated
comprehensive re-establishment of exit checks at all ports and
40

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
airports (see Getting the Basics Right) to achieve this. For those who
are already here illegally the creation of a hostile environment is an
ineffective lever. This was clearly demonstrated by the failure of
the Home Office ‘Operation Vaken’, the evaluation of which
showed only 11 overstayers were returned as a result of the ‘Go
Home’ vans, but the collateral damage to community relations was
huge.
6.3.1.2 Liberal Democrats firmly reject the use of such gimmicks,
random stop and search policies and racial profiling in general.
6.3.1.3 Instead we need an approach that targets those who
prevent or discourage overstayers from notifying the UK
authorities of their presence in the country – specifically criminal
gangs, those who operate in the black market, and those who are
trafficking or exploiting irregular migrants. Liberal Democrats
would channel additional resources into Immigration Enforcement
so they can spend more time and effort identifying and
investigating these criminals.
6.3.1.4 So Liberal Democrats propose an intelligence-led approach
to tackling illegal immigration, with more investment into
investigating criminal gangs, the black market, and others who
support illegal migration with a robust returns policy.
6.3.1.5 Liberal Democrats would look to strengthen the UK’s
cooperation with Europol, which is the European Union’s law
enforcement agency aimed at helping member states tackle crime
and terrorism, rather than weaken it as our Coalition partners
propose. We further note that the Eurodac system has led to the
successful return of 12,000 asylum seekers from the UK since 2004,
further evidence that a strong relationship with the EU can bring
us direct practical value (see also Asylum Seekers chapter).
Spring Conference 2014

41

Making Migration Work for Britain

6.3.2

Routes to regularisation for overstayers

Adults
6.3.2.1 It is important that the law is both firm and fair for those
who are here illegally. For adults who have been living
continuously in the UK for 20 years there is eligibility to apply for
limited leave to remain, after which they can apply for Indefinite
Leave to Remain, provided they have no criminal record.
6.3.2.2 Liberal Democrats propose to retain this provision
unchanged.
Children
6.3.2.3 Migrant children are often in a vulnerable position. They
are often here by no fault of their own. For many, the UK is all they
have known and it is their country. It is right that a route to
regularisation for children is in place. An estimated 120,000
irregular migrant children live in the UK 19.
6.3.2.4 Existing legislation provides a route open to children
under 18, who have lived in the UK for a continuous period of at
least 7 years, to be granted limited leave to remain for 30 months,
as long as they meet the suitability criteria, after which they can
apply for Indefinite Leave to Remain.
6.3.2.5 Therefore Liberal Democrats propose to retain the existing
legislation to provide irregular status children a route to
regularisation.
19 No way In, No Way Out; ESRC Centre for Migration; May 2012

42

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain

6.3.2.6 This provides children who are in the UK illegally a way to
become legitimate contributing citizens, rather than risk being
removed to a country that is unknown to them. However the
existing legislative framework is fragmented and complex, and
poorly understood by the people it may apply to, and even by
professionals in the field. It is important that legitimate applicants
who could access regularisation are not prevented from doing so,
nor that others benefit when they are not entitled.
6.3.2.7 Therefore Liberal Democrats propose to consolidate the
existing fragmented legislation routes to regularisation for children
into a single legal provision.

Spring Conference 2014

43

Making Migration Work for Britain

Asylum Seekers and Refugees
7.1

Why We Need to Take Action

7.1.1
The UK is bound, under the United Nations Convention
on Refugees, to admit persons 'with a well-founded fear of being
persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, or membership of
a particular social group or political opinion, who are outside the
country of his/her nationality and who are unable, or owing to such
fear, unwilling to avail themselves of the protection of that country
and return to it'. Liberal Democrats firmly support this convention
and aspire to a new and improved asylum system which can both
strongly uphold that commitment, whilst minimising the potential
for abuse of the system itself. But that does not mean that we do
not recognise the challenges it brings.
7.1.2
In fact the numbers of asylum seekers have fallen in
recent years – in the year to June 2012 just 25,875 people arrived
in the UK claiming asylum, 5% of the total immigration figure 20.
Between 1994 and 2003, the figure ranged from 25% to 54% 21.
Nevertheless it is still an area of public concern and there is
now widespread political agreement that the current
operation of the asylum system has failed for everyone
involved.
7.1.3
Almost half those who seek asylum remain despite not
having their application granted. Many of these people cannot
return home because their country of origin refuses to recognise
20

Home Office; Immigration Statistics: October to December 2012; February 2013.
21 Migration to the UK: Asylum; Migration Observatory, February 2013.

44

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
their citizenship or because that country is recognised as unsafe.
They are left in limbo, unable to work in the UK, with no recourse
to public funds, often leading to destitution. These problems are
compounded by poor decision making on asylum claims, with a
quarter of all initial decisions overturned at appeal.
7.1.4
There is also the worrying practice of detention. The UK is
unique in routinely detaining migrants without time limit. In 2011
more than 1,000 people had been detained for over three months,
only 38% of whom were ultimately returned home 22. This
unsuccessful practice has been estimated to cost the taxpayer £75
million a year. Less costly and more effective solutions are urgently
needed.

7.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions

7.2.1
Liberal Democrats want an improved asylum system
which both strongly upholds the UN Convention and minimises
the potential for abuse. That requires finding ways of establishing
which asylum claims are genuine, whilst ensuring that people are
treated humanely, with compassion and respect, including those
who are to be returned. While these issues are complex and
sensitive, we believe there is a better way to deal with asylum
cases; one which doesn’t let asylum seekers suffer in detention
centres or in poverty.

22 The financial waste of long-term detention; Detention Action; March 2013.

Spring Conference 2014

45

Making Migration Work for Britain

7.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals

Better decisions
Asylum cases are complex, and decision-makers have to
7.3.1
make judgments about the validity of a claim while dealing with
sensitive situations and cultural and language barriers.
Nevertheless much more can be done to get decisions right the
first time. In particular, support and professional guidance should
be given to asylum seekers:
•

Better training is needed for staff who deal directly with
more vulnerable groups such as victims of torture or
trafficking, mentally ill people, pregnant women, children
and LGBT people.

•

Better interpretation and translation services should be
available at each stage of the process, with safeguards in
place to ensure that interpreters and translators dealing
with each case have the knowledge of language
required.

•

Accurate, up-to-date understanding of relevant Country
of Origin Information must be provided to decision
makers.

7.3.2
Liberal Democrats aim at ‘getting it right first time’, thus
reducing appeals and ensuring that those who should leave the
UK do so.
7.3.3
Therefore Liberal Democrats will ensure better support and
professional guidance in asylum cases so that decisions are right the

46

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
first time, reducing appeal costs and ensuring that those who should
leave the UK do so.
7.3.4
It should be noted that the Eurodac Regulation, which
manages an EU asylum fingerprint database, has led to the
removal of 12,000 asylum seekers from the UK since 2004. This
achieved significant savings in relation to the costs of processing
and supporting those cases. Further examples of the benefits a
strong relationship with the EU can bring are set out in the EU
Migration chapter of this paper.
7.3.5
In June 2010 the 6 month maximum target time for
asylum claim decisions was abolished. With the proposals to
improve UKBA’s successor set out in the Getting the Basics Right
chapter we believe this target should be restored. All current
backlogs that were built up under the former UKBA will be tackled
as a priority to give dignity and justice to those who have been
waiting for unacceptable amounts of time.
7.3.6
Liberal Democrats propose to re-establish the 6 month
decision-making target for asylum claims.
Requirement to seek work
7.3.7
Currently some asylum seekers wait two years or more for
a decision on their asylum claim in the UK. In the meantime they
receive asylum support from the public pot, instead of being
allowed to earn their own money to support themselves or
contribute to the UK. The EU Reception Directive, which the UK has
opted out of, places an obligation on member states to provide
access to the labour market no later than 9 months from the date
of the initial application to asylum seekers. Eleven EU countries not
only abide by this but have gone further by allowing asylum
Spring Conference 2014

47

Making Migration Work for Britain
seekers to work after six months or less from making their asylum
application.
7.3.8
Therefore, so that asylum seekers can better support
themselves, while contributing to the public purse, Liberal Democrats
will require all working age asylum seekers to look for work if their
case has not been resolved within 6 months. Current restrictions on
which occupations asylum seekers can work in will also be lifted.
7.3.9
Asylum seekers who cannot work, or who cannot find
work, will remain in housing funded through the Home Office and
on the section 95 rate of benefits.
7.3.10 Whilst asylum seekers await their decision (pre-6 months)
we will aim to make sure that appropriate training and
volunteering opportunities are made available so they can make a
contribution to society and be better prepared to find work. Our
proposals in relation in the Social Cohesion chapter will go a long
way to achieve this.
Destitution
7.3.11 The British Red Cross currently support 6,000 destitute
refugees and asylum seekers each year. Destitution for those who
came to the UK to seek sanctuary is unacceptable. Requiring
asylum seekers to work after 6 months will provide them with
money of their own and go a long way towards preventing them
from becoming destitute. This will also reduce the public money
spent on supporting asylum seekers.
7.3.12 There is little evidence to suggest that enforcing
destitution upon failed asylum seekers encourages them to leave
the country. The current Azure Card system for failed asylum
48

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
seekers restricts their ability to pay for basic goods and, due to
inefficiencies, costs the taxpayer more than it saves.
7.3.13 Therefore Liberal Democrats propose to abolish the Azure
Card and Section 4 and provide all asylum support under Section 95.
7.3.14 This change would avoid the disruption, destitution and
bureaucratic waste of the S4 process. It will be better value for
money, be more flexible, and less demeaning for the seeker of
sanctuary concerned. As Refugee Action put it “Any costs incurred
could be offset by simplifying the asylum support system and
replacing the current two-tier bureaucratic arrangement with one
support stream – section 95 – that harmonises the levels and type of
support, and removes the need for transfers between different support
streams”.
7.3.15 The current level of Section 95 benefits has not risen in
line with inflation or other benefits since 2008, causing asylum
seekers to be increasingly worse off. Uprating asylum benefits
would allow asylum seekers a modest, but more humane,
subsistence in the UK. To do so, responsibility for S95 should be
transferred from the Home Office to the DWP.
7.3.16 Liberal Democrats would immediately transfer the
responsibility for S95 benefits to the DWP allowing them to be uprated
in the same way as other benefits, we would also urgently review the
level of S95 benefits to ascertain that they are set at a fair level.
Delivery of asylum services
7.3.17 Serious problems also persist around private companies
that hold outsourced contracts for the delivery of enforcement
and asylum services. For asylum services, service standards must
Spring Conference 2014

49

Making Migration Work for Britain
be monitored more effectively, with more accountability and
transparency in their work.
7.3.18 For enforcement, high profile failures of private
companies,such as the tragic death of Jimmy Mubenga, have led
to a loss in confidence that these services are being performed
with sufficient accountability.
7.3.19 So Liberal Democrats propose to restore deportation
transportation and the accountability of enforcement functions to the
public sector as soon as the current contracts permit.
Detention
7.3.20 The UK is the European Union’s biggest detainer of
migrants; a record 28,909 migrants were detained in 2012, most of
whom are guilty of no crime, and many of whom will have been
detained in conditions equivalent to high-security prisons. The
detention of one person for a year costs the tax-payer over
£47,000. In addition the Home Office paid out £12 million in 200910 in compensation and legal costs arising from unlawful
detention actions 23. Independent research by Matrix Evidence
concluded that £75 million per year could be saved if asylum
seekers who cannot be deported were released in a timely
manner. Routinely detaining asylum seekers indefinitely is a
significant burden on the taxpayer and a waste of time and
resources.
7.3.21 Liberal Democrats propose to end Indefinite Detention for
immigration purposes.

23 The financial waste of long-term detention; Detention Action; March 2013.

50

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
7.3.22 We would have to look carefully at setting a time limit for
detention, taking account of the capacity of UKBA’s successor to
process cases quickly and learning from the rules successfully
implemented by our European partners – which range from
18months to 45 days. In the longer term we see no reason why the
limit should not be at the lower limit of this range.
7.3.23 In addition, the Detained Fast Track procedure represents
a disproportionately high use of detention in asylum in
comparison to other European countries.
7.3.24 Therefore Liberal Democrats propose to end the
inappropriate use of the Detained Fast Track.
Child detention
7.3.25 One of our proudest achievements in government is
ending child detention – but we must ensure it can never be used
again.
7.3.26 Liberal Democrats also propose to legislate to ensure that
our measures to end Child Detention for Immigration Purposes are
solidly written into law.
Alternatives to detention
7.3.27 There are demonstrably cheaper and more effective ways
of obtaining returns than detention. For instance whilst almost half
those who seek asylum remain in the UK despite not having their
application granted, Sweden has a voluntary return rate of 82%.
They provide community-based support for asylum-seekers
throughout their application process. The model is based on
engagement with migrants rather than enforcement. A case
Spring Conference 2014

51

Making Migration Work for Britain
manager ensures access to legal advice, housing, welfare support
and information about their case and options for the future.
7.3.28 To switch to the Swedish model in the UK is estimated by
Matrix to cost around £164.2 million, only 44% of the savings made
as a result of avoiding detention (cost savings of £377.4 million
over a 5 year time period). Additionally, as voluntary returns are far
cheaper than enforced removals, this would likely lead to further
savings as well as increased overall numbers of returns. In the
current fiscal climate we cannot afford to ignore such innovative
best practice.
7.3.29 Therefore Liberal Democrats propose the implementation of
community-based alternatives to detention that will help individuals
to engage with the immigration system and reduce costs.

52

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain

Sticking Together – Identity and
Social Cohesion
8.1

Why We Need to Take Action

The problem isn’t just about immigration
8.1.1
Even the least diverse areas can struggle to build civic
capital and strong local communities, and the need for more
community capacity is not at all confined to areas of high inward
migration.
8.1.2
Factors such as social class, home environment, financial
stability and aspirations all play important roles in forming
individuals’ identity, not simply ethnicity. Identity is multi-faceted
and can change over time, and trying to pigeon-hole each other is
not useful. Likewise, whilst encouraging integration can be
important, integration is not the same as assimilation.
8.1.3
Nor is the pressure on services in areas of expanding
population solely created by overseas migrants. London and the
South East are powerful magnets for UK citizens seeking work,
promotion, or cultural opportunities as well.
8.1.4
Nevertheless in some places the impact of immigration
on communities is real, with non-migrants worried that those
settling in the UK don’t share their language, culture or beliefs.
Liberal Democrats recognise and acknowledge those concerns and
seek to prevent any community becoming segregated or alienated
due to race, culture or class, with people left living parallel lives.
The proposals in this Policy Paper therefore do particularly focus
Spring Conference 2014

53

Making Migration Work for Britain
on policies aimed at building civic capital and creating an
environment where partnership is normal and extremism has no
place.
8.1.5
While we believe that all mainstream religions and
cultural traditions are compatible with our broad British values, for
too long indigenous communities’ worries about social cohesion
have taken a back seat. Recognising the importance of identity
and coming up with policies that ensure better social cohesion are
vital parts of any holistic immigration strategy.
8.1.6
The public also have concerns about the pressure
population change can put on public services. It is important to
acknowledge that at the ‘macro’ level there are well-evidenced
benefits that migrants give to our public services, filling skills gaps,
and providing tax revenue and growth to the wider economy.
However at the level of the local community shortages of school
places, housing, health care and social service provision can be real
and painful.

8.2

Liberal Democrat Ambitions

One society, many cultures
8.2.1
As Liberal Democrats we approach life in a liberal way,
welcoming difference rather than being unduly worried by it. We
are instinctively reluctant to dictate to people how they should live
their lives and coexist on a local level.
8.2.2
However, we recognise the risks presented by
intergenerational tensions and cultural differences. Often
resentment is fuelled by poor communication skills. That’s why we
give high priority to encouraging migrants to gain the knowledge
54

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
of English language culture and of the public services they will
need to play a full part in the wider community. It must be good
from every viewpoint for all long-term residents in the UK to
have good English skills, and we aim to facilitate that being
achieved within the next generation, starting now.
8.2.3
Another challenge to social cohesion can be driven by
resentment based on exclusion from or competition for public
services and work in areas of high and rapid population growth.
Current public financing models are not agile enough to allocate
resources or to respond robustly on the right timescales to meet
the needs and defuse the inevitable tensions they generate. That’s
why we give high priority to developing mechanisms that take
better account of pressures on public services in local areas
facing rapid inward migration.
8.2.4
Liberal Democrats believe that alongside these two vital
steps we should support local-based initiatives that bring
individuals and communities ‘out of their shells’ whatever their
origins or background. We aim to help them to experience and
contribute fully to wider society and to share and maintain
their own lifestyle and culture as they see fit.

8.3

Liberal Democrat Policy Proposals

English language and culture
8.3.1
If we are to have every long-term resident of the UK
speaking English the first step must be to put strong incentives in
place to encourage migrants and their families to improve their
language skills. Census data shows that 1.3% of the population
cannot speak English well, 0.3% cannot speak English at all. For
them finding work will always be problematic. However the
Spring Conference 2014

55

Making Migration Work for Britain
benefits system does provide an opportunity to support language
learning.
8.3.2
Liberal Democrats propose that all new claimants for
Jobseeker’s Allowance (JSA) should have their English language skills
assessed, and that for those identified JSA will be conditional on
attending state funded English language courses. This proposal is in
line with current plans by the Home Office.
8.3.3
It is particularly important for those migrants looking to
settle permanently in the UK to be equipped to play an active part
in their communities. Migrants applying for citizenship or
indefinite leave to remain in the UK are currently required to pass a
Knowledge of Language and Life test (KOLL) or to hold a
qualification in English at B1 on the Common European
Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR) as well as pass a
‘Knowledge of life in the UK’ test.
8.3.4
These requirements ensure migrants’ English language
skills are sufficient to perform basic functions, but do not go so far
as to ensure a proficiency in English. Liberal Democrats believe
that migrants settling permanently should be required to have a
standard of English good enough to engage fully in civic society.
8.3.5
Liberal Democrats propose that the level of English
language required should be increased closer to the ‘proficiency level’
and that the KOLL test should be made more demanding to reflect this
level.
8.3.6
The knowledge component of the KOLL test at present
focuses on background knowledge of Britain’s history, geography
and culture; however it does not aim to ensure migrants are
equipped with the practical knowledge they need to play a full
56

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
part in their communities or to interact with public services in the
UK.
8.3.7
Liberal Democrat propose that the KOLL test should focus
more on the knowledge migrants need to understand British
communities and way of life with a particular emphasis on interacting
with public services.
8.3.8
Encouraging migrants to engage with the English
language can only go so far in improving their skills if the correct
support is not available.
8.3.9
We strongly welcome the £30m English language
programme launched by DCLG in 2013, which engages with a variety
of local organisations to provide knowledge and training in skills
needed to use English in daily life, and we propose to expand its range
and scope substantially.
Funding for public services and community cohesion
8.3.10 Liberal Democrats take the pressure migration can put on
public services seriously. At present there is no robust information
available to properly understand localised impacts. When these
are not well understood there is room for polarisation and identity
politics to take hold. We need better knowledge of actual
migration flows and their impact on public services to inform local
service planning and funding. Currently there are several data
collection routes, but they are neither standardised nor linked and
(in the case of the Census) not contemporary. We welcome the
DWP decision to record country of origin on Universal Credit claim
forms, which will provide some facts instead of myths on benefit
claimants’ backgrounds, as well as giving a better basis for
assessing changing demands on public service.
Spring Conference 2014

57

Making Migration Work for Britain

8.3.11 We propose that further urgent work is done to standardise
data collected in each area on population flows so that public service
design can be based on timely evidence.
8.3.12 However meanwhile sometimes more rapid action may
be needed to meet acute pressures. The Government’s response to
the rapid arrival of many retired Gurkha soldiers and their families
in Aldershot could be a template for action. A large Nepalese influx
put acute pressure on local public services and caused tensions in
the community. In response an emergency fund of £1.5 million
was created to meet urgent needs. Whilst there is much more to
be done on Gurkha integration there, the establishment of such a
central funding mechanism responsive to rapid population
changes is a model we welcome.
8.3.13 In the current fiscal climate we must be responsible in
how we find money for such initiatives. The EU Commission has
proposed that in the 2014-2020 period at least 20 % of the
European Social Fund (ESF) should be spent on promoting social
inclusion and combating poverty in each Member State 24. Noting
the impact that EU migrants themselves can have we believe it is
right that this £1 billion funding should be invested in relieving
social and service pressures affecting communities under pressure.
This should not be simply new provision for new residents, but
a genuine investment of help for the whole neighbourhood
and community.
8.3.14 Liberal Democrats propose to create a new Community
Protection Fund, initially funded by £1 billion from the ESF social
EU Commission; Free Movement of EU citizens and their families: Five actions to
make a difference; Nov 2013.
24

58

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
cohesion budget planned by the Commission, and will use it in
support of neighbourhood cohesion projects and to ease pressure on
local public services, with local authorities being able to bid for funds
to provide support for specific public services in identified areas of
greatest pressure. 25
Supporting and building lively and vibrant communities
8.3.15 The Deputy Prime Minister’s Social Mobility Strategy,
the Newlove reports, and the work on ‘Creating the conditions for
integration’ from DCLG have all rightly taken a wide-angle view of
what needs to be done to strengthen communities and empower
individuals. There is good work under way from all these, but there
needs to be more of it.
8.3.16 Mainstream programmes such as the Pupil Premium,
extended entitlement to free early years education, and the Youth
Contract also have important roles to play in ensuring that every
young person is equipped to play an active part in their local and
national communities.
8.3.17 We have also taken evidence from a wide range of
people and organisations that have practical examples of success
and innovation in community development at local level. Faith
Matters and the iCoCo Foundation were particularly helpful. One
powerful learning point is that the best and most successful
impacts are not made by centrally-directed and run programmes,
but by initiatives run and owned by local communities. Often lowcost and volunteer-led they may need encouragement and

25 This fund would be channelled through Local Enterprise Partnerships in line
with changes made to the administration of ESG funding for the 2014 -2020
allocation.

Spring Conference 2014

59

Making Migration Work for Britain
facilitation, and some seed funding, but they do not need to be
told what to do or regimented in how to do it.
8.3.18 We propose that such schemes should be eligible to bid into
our new Community Protection Fund.
8.3.19 There is a huge vocabulary of good practice and good
outcomes to draw on. We do not therefore propose to add to
them, but rather to point to those which we believe a future
Liberal Democrat government would see as priorities for
expansion or replication in the next Parliament.
8.3.20 These include the National Citizens Service and Youth
United projects, and the Community Organisers amongst others.

60

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain

Glossary
Asylum Seeker/Seekers of Sanctuary: A person who has left their
country of origin and formally applied for asylum in another
country but whose application has not yet been concluded.
Dependant: Someone who depends on you financially, such as a
husband, wife, partner, or child.
Deportation and Removal: It is important to distinguish between
‘deportation’ and removal. Where a person has no leave to be in
the UK they are expected to depart voluntarily. If they do not, the
Secretary of State can take steps to remove them. This is an
administrative measure. It should be contrasted with deportation
where the Secretary of State deems that the deportation of a
person from the UK is ‘conducive to the public good. Removal is
authorised by the 1999 Act and deportation is authorised by the
1971 Act.
Discretionary Leave to Remain: Permission to stay in the United
Kingdom for reasons that are exceptional. This is sometimes given
to someone who does not qualify for asylum but whom we believe
should be allowed to stay for other reasons.
E-Borders: E-Borders is the name of our programme of electronic
border control.
Economic Migrant: Someone who has moved to another country
to work.
Educational Institution: A school, college or university.

Spring Conference 2014

61

Making Migration Work for Britain
ESOL: English for speakers of other languages.
European Single Market: seeks to guarantee the free movement
of goods, capital, services and people - the EU's
‘four freedoms’ – within the EU’s 28 member states.
EU/EEA migrant: Someone who has moved to another country
who is a citizen of the European Union/European Economic Area.
Habitual Residence Test: Evaluates whether a person has lived in
the country for an “appreciable period of time” and “if they intend
to continue living in that country”.
Illegal immigrant: Someone whose entry into or presence in a
country contravenes immigration laws.
Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR): Permission to remain in the UK
without any time restrictions on the length of stay.
International/Overseas/Foreign Student: A student who has
chosen to study in a country other than his/her own.
Irregular migrants/Overstayers: A person who no longer has
permission to be in the country.
Limited Leave to Remain: Permission to stay in the United
Kingdom temporarily, for the length of time stated on your visa.
Net Migration: Net migration rate is the difference of immigrants
and emigrants of an area in a period of time.
Refugee: In the UK, a person is officially a refugee when they have
their claim for asylum accepted by the government.
62

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain

Refused asylum seeker: A person whose asylum application has
been unsuccessful, and who has no other claim for protection
awaiting a decision.
Removal: A legal process we follow that enables us to force a
person to leave the United Kingdom if he/she has no right to be
here.
Resident Labour Market Test: This is the process an employer
must follow before employing a person who is not a permanent
resident of the United Kingdom if he/she is first required to show
that no resident worker could be found to take a job.

Spring Conference 2014

63

Making Migration Work for Britain

List of Policy Proposals
1. Liberal Democrats propose that Parliament debate and vote
on immigration policy each year.
2. Liberal Democrats propose that students should be taken out
of any future net migration target.
3. Liberal Democrats propose that only international graduates
of UK universities in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Maths subjects are permitted to work for three years in the UK,
conditional on securing graduate-level work within 6 months
of completing their course.
4. Liberal Democrats propose to establish a Student and College
Compliance and Liaison Team to ensure that educational
institutions and international students are complying with the
rules placed upon them.
5. Liberal Democrats propose that fully compliant educational
institutions will benefit from automatic renewal of ‘Highly
Trusted Status’ for three years.
6. Liberal Democrats propose to double the number of
inspections on employers to ensure that their workforce is
being paid at least the national minimum wage, and that all
statutory employment legislation is being honoured.
7. Liberal Democrats propose to implement ‘Training up Britain’,
a mentoring scheme aimed at using highly skilled migrants to
develop the skills of the British workforce.
64

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain

8. Liberal Democrats support the EU Commission’s proposal to
extend the time before which EU migrants can claim benefits
in the UK to 6 months.
9. Liberal Democrats support Coalition Government measures to
strengthen the Habitual Residence Test for EU migrants.
10. Liberal Democrats propose a new entry permit available only
for those already having a business visitor visa who want to
study whilst in the UK.
11. Liberal Democrats propose to work with our European
partners to develop more effective and appropriate transition
controls for countries entering the EU in future, and to
harmonise EU migrant welfare support rights.
12. Liberal Democrats propose to ask the Migration Advisory
Committee to reconsider the minimum income threshold for a
spouse to come to the UK in light of the principle that a person
with the means to support their family should be allowed to
do so.
13. Liberal Democrats would invite the MAC to give further advice
on allowing immigration officers discretion over spouses
entering the UK based on any offer of employment, likely
employment or their earnings in their home country.
14. Liberal Democrats propose that migrants bringing elderly
relatives to the country should be allowed to do so where they
are able to maintain and accommodate them without recourse
to public funds.

Spring Conference 2014

65

Making Migration Work for Britain
15. Liberal Democrats propose that sponsors of elderly
dependants, over the age of state retirement, should pay a
health levy before their dependants are allowed to settle in the
UK.
16. Liberal Democrats propose the introduction of a
‘grandparents’ super visa’ that would allow grandparents to
visit for a period of up to two years on condition of an
actuarial-calculated health levy.
17. Liberal Democrats propose that children of unmarried British
fathers born before July 2006 and of unmarried British mothers
before January 1983 should be allowed to claim British
Citizenship by descent, subject to providing sufficient proof of
parentage.
18. Liberal Democrats propose to accelerate the delivery of full
monitoring of all UK border entry and exits, and will set aside
additional resources if necessary to speed up progress.
19. Liberal Democrats propose to retain UKBA’s successor
functions within the Home Office, with the Home Secretary
maintaining accountability to Parliament for both its successes
and failures.
20. Liberal Democrats propose that the Chief Inspector of Borders
and Immigration makes an Annual Report directly to
Parliament as part of its annual oversight and consideration of
immigration policy (See 1 above).
21. Liberal Democrats propose that senior representatives from
the Department for Business, Innovations and Skills, and of

66

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
local government across the UK, should sit on the UKBA
successor’s Oversight Board in the Home Office.
22. Liberal Democrats propose the accelerated roll out of face to
face visa processing based on the successful PEO model, with
the ambition that all visas applied for within the UK are
processed in this way by the end of the next Parliament.
23. Liberal Democrats propose the UKBA’s successor should set
the ambition that all immigration officers processing visa or
asylum applications should be of an Executive Officer grade by
2020 with commensurate levels of skills and sensitivity.
24. Liberal Democrats propose the Home Office should develop an
accredited training and CPD programme for immigration
officers, addressing their need for language skills for visa
applications, understanding of cultural differences and giving
them an increased ability to identify fraudulent applications
accurately.
25. Liberal Democrats propose the Home Office is made
responsible for the costs of immigration and asylum appeals,
the appellant will still be expected to cover his/her own costs.
26. Liberal Democrats propose an intelligence-led approach to
tackling illegal immigration, with more investment into
investigating criminal gangs, the black market, and others who
support illegal migration with a robust returns policy.
27. Liberal Democrats propose to retain existing legislation to
provide irregular adults a route to regularisation provision
unchanged.

Spring Conference 2014

67

Making Migration Work for Britain
28. Liberal Democrats propose to retain the existing legislation to
provide irregular status children a route to regularisation.
29. Liberal Democrats propose to consolidate the existing
fragmented legislation routes to regularisation for children
into a single legal provision.
30. Liberal Democrats will ensure better support and professional
guidance in asylum cases so that decisions are right the first
time, reducing appeal costs and ensuring that those who
should leave the UK do so.
31. Liberal Democrats propose to re-establish the 6 month
decision-making target for asylum claims.
32. Liberal Democrats will require all working age asylum seekers
to look for work if their case has not been resolved within 6
months. Current restrictions on which occupations asylum
seekers can work in will also be lifted.
33. Liberal Democrats propose to abolish the Azure Card and
Section 4 and provide all asylum support under Section 95.
34. Liberal Democrats would immediately transfer the
responsibility for S95 benefits to the DWP allowing them to be
uprated in the same way as other benefits, and would urgently
review the level of S95 benefits to ascertain that they are set at
a fair level.
35. Liberal Democrats propose to restore deportation
transportation and the accountability of enforcement
functions to the public sector as soon as the current contracts
permit.
68

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain

36. Liberal Democrats propose to end indefinite detention for
immigration purposes.
37. Liberal Democrats propose to end the inappropriate use of the
Detained Fast Track.
38. Liberal Democrats propose to legislate to ensure that our
measures to end Child Detention for immigration purposes are
solidly written into law.
39. Liberal Democrats propose the implementation of communitybased alternatives to detention that will help individuals to
engage with the immigration system and reduce costs.
40. Liberal Democrats propose that all new claimants for
Jobseeker’s Allowance (JSA) should have their English
language skills assessed, and that for those identified JSA will
be conditional on attending state funded English language
courses.
41. Liberal Democrats propose that the level of English language
required should be increased closer to the ‘proficiency level’
and that the Knowledge of Language and Life test should be
made more demanding to reflect this level.
42. Liberal Democrats propose that the Knowledge of Language
and Life test should focus more on the knowledge migrants
need to understand British communities and way of life with a
particular emphasis on interacting with public services.

Spring Conference 2014

69

Making Migration Work for Britain
43. Liberal Democrats propose that further urgent work is done to
standardise data collected in each area on population flows so
that public service design can be based on timely evidence.
44. Liberal Democrats propose to create a new Community
Protection Fund, initially funded by £1 billion from the
European Social Fund, and will use it in support of
neighbourhood cohesion projects and to ease pressure on
local public services.
45. Liberal Democrats propose that schemes for community
cohesion should be eligible to bid into the new Community
Protection Fund.

70

Policy Paper 116

Making Migration Work for Britain
Making Migration Work for Britain - Policy Paper 116
This paper has been approved for debate by the Federal Conference by
the Federal Policy Committee under the terms of Article 5.4 of the Federal
Constitution. Within the policy-making procedure of the Liberal
Democrats, the Federal Party determines the policy of the Party in those
areas which might reasonably be expected to fall within the remit of the
federal institutions in the context of a federal United Kingdom. The Party
in England, the Scottish Liberal Democrats, the Welsh Liberal Democrats
and the Northern Ireland Local Party determine the policy of the Party on
all other issues, except that any or all of them may confer this power upon
the Federal Party in any specified area or areas. The Party in England has
chosen to pass up policy-making to the Federal level. If approved by
Conference, this paper will therefore form the policy of the Federal Party
on federal issues and the Party in England on English issues. In
appropriate policy areas, Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland party
policy would take precedence.
Many of the policy papers published by the Liberal Democrats imply
modifications to existing government public expenditure priorities. We
recognise that it may not be possible to achieve all these proposals in the
lifetime of one Parliament. We intend to publish a costing programme,
setting out our priorities across all policy areas, closer to the next general
election.

Spring Conference 2014

71

Making Migration Work for Britain
Working Group on Immigration, Asylum and Identity
Note: Membership of the Working Group should not be taken to indicate
that every member necessarily agrees with every statement or every
proposal in this Paper.
Sir Andrew Stunell MP (Chair)
Zulfiqar Ali
Eileen Baxendale
Emma Coakley
Dr Brendan D’Cruz
Suzanne Fletcher
Antony Hook
Julian Huppert MP
Sarah Ludford MEP

Sarah MacDougall
Dr Bablin Molik
Alasdair Murray
Anuja Prashar
Humaira Sanders
Keith Sharp
Tom Smithard
Lord Strasburger
Ruwan Uduwerage-Perera

Staff:
Steve O’Neil
Louise Higgins
Comments on the paper are welcome and should be addressed to:
Policy Unit, Liberal Democrats, 8-10 Great George Street, SW1P 3AE.
ISBN: 978-1-907046-82-7 © Feb 2014.
Further copies of this paper may be obtained, price £5 from:
Liberal Democrat Image, The Workshop, Cheyne Way, Farnborough,
Hampshire, GU14 8RX. Tel: 07505 412 467. Email:
info@libdemimage.co.uk
Printed by Sarum Colourview Ltd , Unit 8, Woodford Centre, Lysander
Way, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 6BU.
Cover design by Steve Lawson.

72

Policy Paper 116

