LABOUR WILL
1.	Raise the Minimum Wage
to £8 an hour and ban
exploitative zero hour
contracts
2.	Freeze energy bills until 2017
while reforming the broken
energy market
3.	 C
 ut the deficit more fairly by
asking those earning over
£150,000 to contribute a little
more through a 50p rate of
tax
4.	Get at least 200,000 homes
built a year by 2020 and
deliver a fairer deal for
private renters
5.	Scrap the Bedroom Tax
6.	 R
 equire all firms that have a
major government contract
to offer apprenticeships
7.	Repeal the Tories’ plans
to bring competition and
privatisation to the NHS
8.	Ensure the NHS has time to
care with 8,000 more doctors
and 20,000 more nurses,
funded by a mansion tax on
homes worth over £2m
9.	Control immigration so that
entitlements to benefits are
earned and wages are not
undercut
10.	Devolve power to Scotland,
Wales, and the cities and
counties of England
2

ED MILIBAND
My mission is to make Britain
work for everyone, not just for a
privileged few. Building a recovery
that works for you and your family,
ensuring that the next generation
does better than the last and that
the NHS has time to care for those
that need it most.
Over the last four years we have
worked hard to listen and respond
to you: the British people. With
just months to go before the next
General Election I want to give you
a sense of what we have heard and
how we will seek to turn things
around.
People are they being told there is
a recovery when they aren’t feeling
the benefits. They are working
hard, but not being rewarded.
Young people fear that they are
going to have a worse life than
their parents. Even those making a
decent living are often still unable
to afford to buy a house. Families
worry that the NHS, one of the
foundation stones of their security,
is under threat. Meanwhile they see
a privileged few doing better and
better.

Some people say this is too difficult,
that it doesn’t matter which party
you vote for. Or that Britain not
working for hardworking people is
just the way things are, especially
when there is a deficit to bring
down. I don’t agree and the policies
outlined here show why. There is
a very real choice on offer. I am
proud of our policy programme,
our plan for Britain.
This isn’t our manifesto, because
there is more to come and we
want your ideas. But in setting out
our priorities for Britain it should
give you an idea of just how deep
our commitment to change runs.
It explains how together we can
build our economy on the success
of the many, a society based on
our shared values and a politics
that gives power away instead of
guarding it. And it shows that even
when there is less money around
we can change things with big
reform not big spending.

As we finalise our manifesto
we want to hear your views
about this plan and what else
we need to do. Please get in
touch by visiting labour.org.uk/
changingbritaintogether.

Ed Miliband
Leader of the Labour Party
PS. Opposite are just 10 ways in
which we believe that together we
should change Britain.
Even if you don’t have lots of time you
can hopefully see what’s at stake for
our country.

Millions of people in this country
are resting their hopes for a fairer,
more just, more equal Britain on
us. We will not let them down.

These are symptoms of a country
that is too unequal. It is a country
I am determined to change and
that is why I want to be your Prime
Minister.
Changing Britain Together

3

CONTENTS
Introduction	6
Economy
A fair plan to deal with the deficit	

8

Supporting growth and business	

10

Creating low carbon jobs	

12

Making work pay and tackling exploitation	

14

Creating opportunity for all young people	

16

Delivering responsible and fair social security	

18

Transport	20
Reforming the energy market	

22

Society
An NHS with time to care	

24

Social Care	

26

Protecting our environment	

28

Rural Communities	

30

Solving the housing crisis	

32

Tackling crime and safeguarding justice	

34

Immigration	36
Childcare and the early years	

38

Raising school standards for all	

40

Politics
Handing more power to communities	

42

Political reform	

44

Equalities	46
Britain in the world

4

Changing Britain Together

Leading in the World	

48

Security, Defence and Supporting our Armed Forces	

50

5

But without radical reform to
our economy, the future will only
belong to the few. And because
our system of government is failing
people, politics has to change
too. With the need to bring down
the deficit and no room for more
spending, we literally cannot afford
to continue with the status quo.
Our task is one of big reform not
big spending.

INTRODUCTION
Life is getting harder for so many people in this country. Under
this Government people have increasingly seen working life
become more stressful, precarious and poorly paid. The younger
generation have seen their employment prospects hit hard, and
have been shut out of the housing market. Poverty and inequality
are increasing. In many communities there is a sense of being
abandoned. People feel that something has been taken from their
lives that they will never get back.
The Conservatives didn’t cause all
of these problems but they have
made them worse. Their divisive
policies mean they cannot renew
our country nor unite us around
the things we have in common as
a nation. They have broken their
promise to reduce the deficit,
borrowing £219 billion more than
they planned. In 2015, George
Osborne will leave the country
with a deficit close to £76 billion,
6

the national debt still rising, and a
trade deficit grown to £31 billion.
That’s why we need a new start.
The British people are proud and
patriotic. They want the chance to
use their skills and talents to make
a better life for themselves, their
children and our country. There is
a fantastic energy and willingness
to work hard and to build a better
future.

Changing Britain Together

rather than wasting money reacting
to problems. We will increase
the local power of local places by
building cooperation among public
services and organisations, pooling
funds to stop inefficiency and avoid
duplication.
We will promote a model of
citizenship based on the give and
take of contribution
and shared
responsibility, with
new approaches on
immigration and
social security. A
Labour government
will lend a helping
hand but we will
also ask more of
people. Everyone
will need to
contribute and
play their part in building a better
country.

without radical
reform to our
economy, the
future will only
belong to the few

In 2015 Labour will
begin laying the
foundations of a
new economy and
a new approach to
government. We
will devolve power,
not just to Scotland
and Wales but to
our great English
cities and counties
too. We will reform markets and
institutions, from energy to the
banks, to deal with the causes of
our economic problems.

We will share power and
responsibility with people to help
them help themselves and shape
their services in response to their
personal circumstances. We will
invest to prevent social problems,
promoting early intervention,

By sharing power and responsibility
with people we will renew our
traditions as a party of work, family
and community. We will work to
create trust again in our democracy
and we will build a strong, inclusive
economy together. The following
pages spell out our ideas about
how we will do it.
7

A FAIR PLAN TO DEAL
WITH THE DEFICIT
Britain has experienced the slowest economic recovery in over a hundred
years. This has not only led to a cost-of-living crisis, it has meant the Toryled Government has failed on get the deficit down too. Because when
people’s earnings are squeezed so is the tax we bring in.
In 2010 David Cameron and George Osborne pledged to balance the
books by 2015. But they are on course to break this promise, instead still
borrowing over £90 billion this year and with a large deficit set to remain
next year.
As well as failing on the deficit the Tories have failed to address it fairly,
raising VAT for ordinary working families while giving those earning over
£150,000 a £3 billion tax cut.
KEY FACTS
•	The Government has borrowed £219 billion more than they
planned.
•	David Cameron raised VAT costing hardworking families £450
each, while cutting tax for people earning over £150,000.
•	 T
 ax and benefit changes since 2010 mean that families are
set to be on average £974 a year worse off by the time of the
General Election.

LABOUR’S PLAN
In 2015 we will have to plan on the basis of falling departmental spending.
The current day-to-day spending totals for 2015-16 will have to remain our
starting point, with no additional borrowing for day-to-day spending.
We can only properly reduce the deficit if our recovery is balanced, longterm and delivers rising living standards for the many. So the next Labour
Government will balance the books and get debt falling, but we will make
different, and fairer, choices.
We will ensure that the burden is fairly shared by restoring the 50p rate
on incomes over £150,000, while helping those on middles and lower
incomes by introducing a lower 10p starting rate of tax. And in tough
times we will remove Winter Fuel Payment from the richest five per cent
of pensioners and cap increases in child benefit at one per cent for the
first two years of the Parliament.
The next Labour Government will work to change Britain at a time when
money is tight – it will be about big reform not big spending. So our
manifesto will contain no spending commitments without saying where
every penny of the money is coming from – we will not make promises we
cannot keep and cannot afford.
LABOUR WILL:
•	Balance the books and deliver a surplus on the current budget
and falling national debt as soon as possible in the next
Parliament.
•	Reverse the 50p tax cut so that those at the top will pay a little
more and introduce a lower 10p starting rate of tax, paid for
by scrapping the unfair Marriage Tax Allowance.
•	 S
 top paying the winter fuel allowance to the richest five per
cent of pensioners.
•	 Cut ministerial pay until we have balanced the books.
•	Ensure every commitment in our manifesto is fully funded,
with no additional borrowing.

8

Changing Britain Together

9

SUPPORTING GROWTH
AND BUSINESS
Britain will never succeed if it tries to compete with a low wage, low skill
business model – a race to the bottom in which ordinary, working people
are always the losers. This approach will not secure more and better
paid jobs for the longer-term. Nor will it lead to the more resilient and
competitive economy that Britain needs following the financial crisis.
Like families, businesses are being hit by the cost of living crisis too. Many
small and medium sized firms are struggling with rising costs and a lack
of finance from the banks – a problem that must be solved in order to get
our economy growing in a more balanced way.
KEY FACTS
•	Business lending is down by over £50 billion since May 2010.
•	The Tory-led Government has failed to deliver on infrastructure
with infrastructure output down since May 2010.

LABOUR’S PLAN
We believe that prosperity must be built by the many, not the few. That
means winning a race to the top, with well paid, high skilled jobs in
new industries, and more people setting up, leading and succeeding in
business. This private sector growth needs to be supported by an active
government, investing for the long-term, setting clear priorities, and
enabling businesses to grow.
Labour’s focus will be on raising productivity, generating sustainable
growth, creating more well-paid jobs, and broadening our economic base
across more regions and sectors. To support this, Labour will reform our
banking system so that it works for businesses and families, back small
business that is the backbone of our economy, including by ensuring they
are paid on time by their suppliers, and devolve power from Whitehall to
our towns and cities.
LABOUR WILL:
•	Cut business rates in 2015 and then freeze them in 2016 for
over 1.5 million business properties.
•	Devolve £30 billion of funding and give control over the full
revenue from the growth in business rates to powerhouse
economic regions so they can back local growth.
•	Reform our banking system: taxing bank bonuses and
increasing competition with at least two new challenger banks
on the high street.
•	Introduce a new levy on payday lenders and use the funds
raised to boost low cost alternatives like credit unions.
•	Create a British Investment Bank along with a network of
regional banks to boost lending for small businesses to grow.
•	Establish an Infrastructure Commission to plan and secure the
infrastructure that Britain needs.
•	Safeguard the services consumers and businesses get from the
privatised Royal Mail and keep the remaining 30 per cent in
public ownership.

10

Changing Britain Together

11

CREATING LOW
CARBON JOBS

LABOUR’S PLAN

Climate change is real, man-made and happening. But David Cameron
mistakenly believes there is a trade-off between protecting British jobs
and tackling climate change,
In betraying his promise to lead the greenest government ever, David
Cameron has undermined Britain’s ability to compete for a global green
industry market worth £3.4 trillion a year and growing. Supporting our
low-carbon industries, creating new high skill, high paying jobs in green
technology, should be a essential part of a strategy to earn our way out of
the cost-of-living crisis. Instead, the Tory-led Government has put jobs at
risk by undermining the strength of one of our key industrial sectors.
KEY FACTS
•	Britain lags behind Germany, India, Japan, China and the
United States in green investment.
•	With the Tory-led Government Britain risks falling further back
– UK renewables investment fell from $14.3 billion in 2012 to
$13.1 billion in 2013.

Labour will make Britain a world leader in low carbon technology and
green jobs. We are determined to take advantage of the opportunities
arising from the low-carbon economy. When we open new renewable
energy sites, we want to see British manufacturing companies producing
the plants, equipment and technology that make them possible. Britain’s
low carbon industries can create a million more of the high skilled jobs we
need to win the race to the top.
We will make Britain the most attractive place in the world to invest in
low-carbon technologies, setting a legal target to remove the carbon from
our electricity supply and developing an active industrial strategy for
the green economy. We will strengthen the Green Investment Bank with
borrowing powers, ensuring it is better placed to support investment in
small and medium green businesses seeking to grow.
LABOUR WILL:
•	Create a million new high technology, green jobs by 2025.
•	 Set a legal target for decarbonising electricity by 2030.
•	Strengthen the Green Investment Bank with borrowing
powers.
•	 Insulate five million homes over the next ten years.

12

Changing Britain Together

13

MAKING WORK PAY AND
TACKLING EXPLOITATION
AT WORK
In Britain today the link between the wealth of our nation and family
finances has been broken. The result is a cost-of-living crisis for millions of
hard working people, who are left feeling more precarious and insecure.
Half of all those in poverty live in working households. Over five million
people are in low paid jobs - one in five workers. Meanwhile, from
allowing the exploitation of zero-hours contracts, to the introduction of
employment tribunal fees the Tory-led Government is failing to live up to
its responsibilities to protect the vulnerable and ensure people are able to
earn their way to higher living standards.
KEY FACTS
•	Since 2010 people are on average earning £1,600 less a year
after inflation.
•	More children in poverty are growing up in working
households than workless ones.
•	There are 1.4 million zero hour contracts in Britain today.

LABOUR’S PLAN
We need to change our economy to make it work for working people,
tackling the root causes of the problems we face. No-one should go out to
a hard day’s work and be rewarded by living in poverty.
Labour will tackle the low pay and insecurity that is fuelling the costof-living crisis, halving the number of people on low pay in our country
by 2025, changing the lives of over two million people. To do this we’ll
raise the National Minimum Wage to £8 an hour before the end of the
next Parliament, while strengthening enforcement so that those paying
less than the minimum wage do not get away with it. Meanwhile we will
promote the Living Wage with government using its spending power to
encourage more employers to pay it and tax rebates for businesses who
sign up in the first year of a Labour Government.
Good workplaces are not just beneficial for employees; they are good
for business and our economy as a whole. So as well as tackling low
pay, we will tackle the causes of insecurity at work, including by banning
exploitative zero hours contracts.
LABOUR WILL:
•	Increase the National Minimum Wage to £8 an hour before the
end of the Parliament.
•	Give Local Authorities a role in enforcing the National
Minimum Wage.
•	Ban exploitative zero hour contracts so that if you work
regular hours you get a regular contract.
•	Reform the employment tribunal system to ensure workplace
justice is affordable.
•	 A
 bolish the loophole that allows firms to pay agency workers
less than permanent staff.
•	Launch an inquiry into blacklisting in the construction
industry.

14

Changing Britain Together

15

CREATING OPPORTUNITY
FOR ALL YOUNG PEOPLE
For too long, our education system has been focused only on providing
opportunity through A-Levels and university. It has failed to provide
alternatives for those who do not choose that path. As a result, many
talented young people, for whom a quality vocational qualification would
have been a better option, have been let down by a system that offers no
clear route to a successful career.
This is limiting life chances for young people while preventing businesses
from getting the skills they need to succeed - holding Britain back.
Yet instead of ensuring we compete with our European counterparts
in delivering opportunities for all young people, the Government has
downgraded apprenticeships and neglected vocational education,
treating them as the second class option.

LABOUR’S PLAN
To build the kind of economy Britain needs to compete with our European
and global neighbours we need to make best use of the talents of all of
our young people. That means taking a new approach to how we educate
and train them – one which offers opportunities for everyone to succeed.
So Labour will radically reform vocational education and apprenticeships,
creating a higher skilled workforce, driving up productivity and
underpinning higher wages.
Our plan for transforming vocational education includes a gold
standard ‘Technical Baccalaureate’ in schools and colleges, many more
apprenticeships and the introduction of Technical Degrees. And to
help give vocational training equal status with academic studies in our
education system we’ll transform good FE colleges into new specialist
Institutes of Technical Education.

KEY FACTS
•	 Just one in ten employers in Britain offer apprenticeships.

LABOUR WILL:

•	 L
 ess than 60 per cent of students have five good GCSEs
including English and maths by age 16. And less than a fifth of
young people without good English and maths grades at 16 go
on to achieve these by 18.

•	Introduce a new gold standard Technical Baccalaureate for 1618 year olds.
•	 Ensure that all young people study English and maths to 18.
•	 R
 equire every firm getting a major government contract to
offer apprenticeships.
•	Give businesses more control over apprenticeships in
exchange for offering more opportunities and raise the
standard and quality of apprenticeships so they last a
minimum of two years.
•	Require large employers hiring skilled workers from outside
the EU to offer apprenticeships.
•	Create thousands more apprenticeships in the public sector.
•	Introduce new Technical Degrees delivered by universities and
employers.

16

Changing Britain Together

17

DELIVERING
RESPONSIBLE AND
FAIR SOCIAL SECURITY
There are too many insecure, low paid jobs in Britain. This doesn’t just
undermine our ability to earn our way out of the cost-of-living crisis, it
means more welfare spending too. The Tory-led Government has failed
to address this problem. Their reforms are not working, hardship is
increasing, and the costs of their failure are mounting.
Because our economy is not working for everyday working people, the
Government is spending billions more on social security than planned
while its attempts to reform welfare have led to a catalogue of chaos,
waste and unfairness.
KEY FACTS
•	 A
 n increase in low-paid jobs is pushing up the benefit bill, as
working families are forced to rely on welfare to make ends
meet.
•	 T
 he housing benefit bill has gone up under the Tories, while we
have seen house building levels at their lowest in peace time
since the 1920s.

LABOUR’S PLAN
Britain needs a responsible and fair social security system. One that
rewards contribution, and protects those who cannot work or cannot
earn enough to support themselves and their families. It also needs to be
affordable.
Keeping social security spending under control, and putting decent values
at the heart of the system, are not conflicting priorities, but go hand in
hand.
Labour will build a social security system which ensures those who are
able to work find a job, and supports people when they need it. We will
control the overall cost of social security spending by tackling the root
causes of rising spending. That means making work pay and building
houses once again. Only by getting more people into work, and creating
better paid and more secure jobs, will we tackle the drivers of rising
benefit bills and ensure the system is sustainable for the long term.
LABOUR WILL:
•	Introduce a Compulsory Jobs Guarantee, paid for by a bank
bonus tax, to provide a paid starter job for every young person
unemployed for over a year.
•	Abolish the cruel, costly and failing Bedroom Tax.
•	Reform the Work Capability Assessment so it focuses on the
support disabled people need to work.
•	Cap structural social security spending as part of each
Spending Review so that it is properly planned and controlled.
•	 A
 llow councils that make savings in the Housing Benefit bill to
recycle them into building homes.

18

Changing Britain Together

19

TRANSPORT

LABOUR’S PLAN

The rising cost of transport is a central part of the cost of living crisis.
People are being squeezed by eye-watering fare increases on buses and
railways, and a reduction in the quantity and quality of local bus services.
Since 2010, rail fares have risen by 20 per cent on average leaving British
rail passengers paying the highest rail fares in Europe.
This has been allowed to happen because David Cameron has chosen to
stand up for the companies who operate our rail and bus services, rather
than empowering the passengers and communities who rely on them.
At the same time motorists have seen the quality of our roads deteriorate
with rising congestion and promised road improvements not being
delivered.

We want an affordable transport system that works for passengers, giving
them a real voice, with decisions on services taken far closer to those
who use them. We will devolve decisions on transport to local authorities
working together to ensure integrated networks across city and county
regions. They will be given control of budgets over road investment and
powers to decide what bus services they want.
We will stand up to vested interests in the transport sector where their
interests are being served instead of those of passengers. We will end the
situation where the only public sector that cannot run our railways is our
own.

LABOUR WILL:

KEY FACTS
•	Rail fares are up an average of 20 per cent since 2010, while
wages have fallen.
•	2,262 miles of local roads are in need of maintenance - further
than from Land’s End to John O’Groats and back again.
•	 1,300 bus routes have been cut since 2010.

•	Introduce a strict cap on annual rail fare increases across all
routes.
•	Legislate so a public sector operator can take on lines and
challenge private train operating companies on a level playing
field.
•	Devolve regional transport decision making so that areas can
bring together trains, buses, ferries and trams into a single
network with smart-ticketing.
•	Give city and county regions London-style powers to regulate
bus services.
•	Make cycling safer and more accessible with national
standards to reduce deaths and serious injuries.

20

Changing Britain Together

21

REFORMING THE ENERGY
MARKET
The energy market isn’t working for families and businesses in Britain.
Energy bills have risen by £300 since 2010, and many businesses say
energy is the biggest cost they face. When wholesale energy prices go
up, bills rocket, but when they fall, bills stay high. One of the reasons for
this is that the big energy firms are operating in a broken market. They
generate electricity, sell it to themselves, then they sell it to consumers.
Ofgem, the regulator that is supposed to be responsible for putting things
right, has failed to do so.
We need change but instead of standing up to the big energy firms who
dominate the market unfairly, David Cameron has stood by as bills have
soared.

LABOUR’S PLAN
Where the current Government has stood up for vested interests in the
energy sector, the next Labour government will stand up for families
and businesses. Our energy policy will tackle rising bills and reform the
market, as well as securing a sustainable, low carbon energy supply for
Britain.
We will freeze prices until 2017, saving the average household £120. While
prices are frozen, we will reset the market so that it works for consumers;
breaking the stranglehold of the ‘Big Six’ energy companies by separating
their generation and supply businesses, and forcing them to buy and sell
their energy through an open exchange. And we will create a tough new
regulator to ensure consumers get a fair deal.
Meanwhile, we’ll undertake an ambitious, long-term programme to
support millions of households and businesses in improving their energy
efficiency and put an end to cold homes.

KEY FACTS
•	Household bills are up by £300 since 2010.
•	The ‘Big Six’ supply 95 per cent of households with gas and
electricity.

LABOUR WILL:
•	Freeze energy bills until 2017.
•	Fix the broken energy market, increasing competition and
transparency.
•	Abolish Ofgem and replace it with a tough new energy
watchdog.
•	 I mprove the energy efficiency of at least five million homes
over 10 years.

22

Changing Britain Together

23

AN NHS WITH
TIME TO CARE

LABOUR’S PLAN

David Cameron promised that under the Tories there would be no topdown NHS reorganisation. He broke that promise. They have wasted £3
billion on an upheaval which puts profits before co-operation and patient
care, and ties hospitals up in competition law.
This wasteful and chaotic reorganisation is having a knock-on effect on
the thing that matters most: patient care. Waiting lists, already rising,
look set to be pushed up even further as budgets are squeezed and more
hospitals fall into deficit. There is a crisis in A&E, not just in winter but all
year round. Vital treatments are being rationed, giving patients the choice
of waiting longer or paying to go private. Millions of people can’t get a GP
appointment when they need one.
KEY FACTS
•	One in four patients wait a week or more to see or speak to a
GP.
•	Over a million people have waited longer than four hours in
A&E over the last 12 months.

The National Health Service is the Labour Party’s greatest achievement.
We created it, we saved it, and we will always support it. Labour’s vision for
our NHS will bring together physical health, mental health and social care
into a single service to meet all of a person’s care needs, with a focus on
prevention. It is a true One Nation vision: a health and care system shaped
around people, not bureaucratic structures or markets.
We will protect and strengthen the NHS, even in an era when money is
tight. We will repeal the Government’s Health and Social Care Act, ensuring
an NHS based on collaboration and integration, not competition and
fragmentation.
We will strengthen the NHS for the future and ensure it has time to care
with 20,000 more nurses and 8,000 more GPs by 2020, paid for by tackling
tax avoidance and introducing a tax on properties worth over £2 million.
LABOUR WILL:
•	Recruit 20,000 more nurses and 8,000 more GPs paid for by a
tax on properties worth £2 million or more.
•	Guarantee a GP appointment within 48 hours – and on the
same day for those who need it.
•	Repeal the Tories’ Health and Social Care Act.
•	Integrate health and social care services into a system of
“whole-person care”.
•	Give mental health the priority it deserves with a new right to
access talking therapies enshrined in the NHS Constitution.
•	Guarantee that patients will wait no longer than one week for
vital cancer tests and results by 2020.
•	Ensure that when changes are proposed to local hospital services
patients and the public have a seat round the table from the very
start, helping design and decide on plans for change.

24

Changing Britain Together

25

SOCIAL CARE

LABOUR’S PLAN

The growing social care crisis is one of the biggest challenges we face
as a society. Since 2010, £2.7 billion has been cut from budgets that pay
for adult social care while the number of older people needing care has
increased. The result is that the system is close to collapse with some
elderly people receiving just 15 minute visits and care for by a workforce
that is undervalued.
The tighter eligibility criteria which are being applied to deal with this
mean that hundreds of thousands fewer people are getting help. And
the rising burden of care charges is adding to the cost of living crisis:
increases in charges now mean that since 2010, elderly and disabled
people are paying almost £740 a year more for vital home care services.

For too many vulnerable people the current health and care system
feels like three fragmented services: physical health in the mainstream
NHS, mental health on the fringes of the NHS, and social care in council
run services. We will change that, bringing the services together around
those needing care – with a single point of contact to organise your care
and new homecare workers in the NHS to support people to stay in their
home.
We will also end the acceptance of exploitation of the social care
workforce, which harms the care people receive. We will stop zero hour
contracts being used when care workers are in practice working regular
hours, and fully enforce the minimum wage.

KEY FACTS

LABOUR WILL:

•	Despite an ageing population, since 2010, £2.7 billion has been
cut from care budgets.

•	Integrate physical health, mental health and social care
services so we can give people a personal care plan and single
point of contact for those with the greatest needs.

•	Over 300,000 Care Workers are on ‘Zero Hours Contracts and
studies estimate up to 220,000 are paid less than the National
Minimum Wage.

•	 T
 rain, recruit and pay new staff through a ‘Time to Care’ fund,
including 5,000 new homecare workers in the NHS to support
people to stay in their home.
•	Create greater rights to care at home.
•	Work with local authorities and care providers to end timelimited 15-minute visits.
•	Tackle the exploitation of care workers, so that travel between
appointments is not an excuse for paying below the minimum
wage and ban exploitative zero hour contracts.

26

Changing Britain Together

27

PROTECTING OUR
ENVIRONMENT

LABOUR’S PLAN

Globally and domestically, safeguarding our environment for the long
term and reducing carbon emissions, while adapting to climate change,
are among the greatest challenges faced by humankind.
However, the current Government has set back the protection of Britain’s
natural environment and wildlife. In spite of David Cameron’s promise
to lead ‘the greenest Government ever’, he has attempted to sell off the
nation’s forests, threatened to repeal the hunting ban, and questioned
the value of laws which give us better air quality, cleaner beaches and
wildlife protection.
Communities affected by flooding have borne the human cost of the
Government’s failure to take environmental protection seriously, with
flood defences cut and downgraded as a priority – leaving thousands of
homes at risk.
KEY FACTS
•	One in six properties in England and Wales are at risk from
flooding.
•	Committee on Climate Change calculations show that current
plans will put an additional 330,000 properties at serious risk
from flooding by 2035.

The last Labour Government led the world with the Climate Change Act
and a range of domestic environmental protection measures. The next
Labour Government will build on that proud record– putting sustainability
back at the top of the agenda, protecting our natural environment and
wildlife for future generations, and re-establishing Britain as a global
leader on climate change.
We’ll stick to ambitious, legally binding targets for carbon reduction –
including the decarbonisation of our electricity supply by 2030, and full
implementation of carbon budgets. Meanwhile, recognising that the
effects of climate change are impacting on British families today, we will
prioritise investment in flood prevention, and produce a new plan for
climate change adaptation.
We will also build on our proud record on animal welfare – starting with
an end to the Government’s inhumane and ineffective badger cull, and a
commitment to maintain the ban on hunting with dogs.
LABOUR WILL:
•	Set a target for decarbonisation of our electricity by 2030.
•	Strengthen the Green Investment Bank with borrowing
powers.
•	 P
 rioritise flood prevention and introduce a new climate change
adaptation plan.
•	End the badger cull and maintain the ban on hunting with
dogs.

28

Changing Britain Together

29

RURAL
COMMUNITIES

LABOUR’S PLAN

The cost-of-living crisis has often hit rural communities even harder than
others, with wages falling and the cost of living rising more rapidly than in
other parts of the country. For example, rural businesses and households
have seen the same soaring energy bills as the rest of the country,
but have an added burden as many have no grid access, forcing them
to use more expensive alternatives for heating. And while many rural
households pay more for transport, access to it is worse than in urban
areas. Instead of standing up for hard pressed rural communities David
Cameron has stood up for vested interests, failing to take action to tackle
the cost of living crisis.
KEY FACTS
•	 H
 ouseholds in rural areas are more likely to be in fuel poverty
than those in urban areas.
•	 P
 eople living in rural communities find it more difficult to
access key services such as schools, hospitals and shops.  

A One Nation Labour government will work for all of Britain – for those
living in rural, coastal and market town communities as well as in
cities. We will ensure that the challenges those communities face are
understood in every department.
Through devolving powers to county regions, rather than just cities as
the Government is doing, we will enable communities to better plan their
own services. For example they will be able to set the right bus routes
and fares. We will also work with employers to challenge low pay in rural
economies following the abolition of the Agricultural Wages Board, and
reduce the cost of doing business by freezing business rates and energy
bills for small and medium enterprises.
To help tackle higher rural energy costs, Labour will pay Winter Fuel
Payments earlier for pensioners using off-grid energy, protecting
pensioners from excessive price spikes on off-grid energy at the onset of
winter. And, for the first time, we will include off-grid energy within the
remit of our new energy regulator.

LABOUR WILL:
•	 D
 eliver Winter Fuel Payments early to pensioners using offgrid energy.
•	 B
 ring the off-grid energy sector under the remit of the
regulator.
•	 D
 evolve billions of pounds and powers, including over public
transport networks, to county regions.
•	 T
 ackle the cost of doing business in rural areas by freezing
business rates and energy bills for small and medium
enterprises.
30

Changing Britain Together

31

SOLVING THE
HOUSING CRISIS

LABOUR’S PLAN

Britain is in the midst of the biggest housing crisis in a generation. The
gap between the number of homes we build and the number of homes
people need is unprecedented, at over 100,000 each year. If unchecked,
the overall gap between housing supply and need is set to rise to two
million by 2020.
The Tories have no plan to tackle the housing crisis. David Cameron has
presided over the lowest levels of house building in peacetime since the
1920s and people across the country are priced out of home ownership
which is now at its lowest point for 30 years. For many that means renting
in the private sector where they have very little security and even families
with children can be forced to move at short notice.
KEY FACTS
•	 D
 avid Cameron has presided over the lowest level of homes
built in peacetime since the 1920s.
•	 O
 ver 1.3 million families with children are now part of
“Generation Rent”.

Labour believes that everyone should be able to live in a home they can
afford and in the communities where they have their roots. We also know
that the housing crisis cannot be tackled unless we start building many
more homes than are built now. Labour will give our communities the
powers they need to get Britain building again, ensuring at least 200,000
new homes a year by 2020 – almost double the current level. We will
tackle land banking so that developers with planning permission have
to use it, and give local authorities powers to ensure that local first time
buyers people are able to take advantage of new homes that are built in
their area.
We will also create a fairer private rented sector, so that in future, renting
is a more secure long term option for families and individuals who cannot
or prefer not to buy. We will legislate for rights to longer term lets, with
predictable rents, to provide affordability, stability and security. And we
will end the injustice of prospective tenants being hit with hundreds of
pounds of unfair charges by regulating letting agents and banning rip-off
letting agent fees on tenants.
LABOUR WILL:
•	 Get at least 200,000 homes built a year by 2020.
•	 B
 uild more affordable homes by prioritising capital investment
in housing.
•	 G
 ive local first-time buyers priority on new homes in housing
growth areas.
•	 H
 and local communities new powers to get homes built where
they want them.
•	 G
 et a fairer deal for private renters by guaranteeing longer
term tenancies with predictable rents and banning rip-off
letting agent fees on tenants.
•	 G
 ive councils greater powers to reduce the number of empty
homes.

32

Changing Britain Together

33

TACKLING CRIME AND
SAFEGUARDING JUSTICE

LABOUR’S PLAN

The first duty of any government is to keep people safe, yet David
Cameron has shown complacency on crime and justice. Frontline policing
has been cut, and the shift to neighbourhood policing achieved under the
last Labour government has been put at risk.

We will protect frontline policing, ensuring the police force is rooted in
our community. We will scrap Police and Crime Commissioners (PCCs) in
order to protect frontline policing, and raise professional standards while
enabling communities to have a greater say over local policing priorities.

Offenders are escaping justice: the number of rape, domestic violence
and child abuse cases reported to the police is going up, but the number
of cases being put forward for prosecution is falling as the service is
hollowed out. Meanwhile the Government is presiding over chaos, with
suicides and riots up, criminals absconding regularly and the reckless selloff of the probation service putting public safety at risk.

Tackling violence against women and girls is a priority for Labour, and we
will publish the country’s first ever Violence against Women and Girls Bill,
establish a Commissioner on domestic and sexual violence, and protect
women’s refuges.
We will deal with the crisis in our prisons, professionalising the
workforce, stamping out corruption and encouraging prisons to get more
offenders in work or training, while reversing as much as we can of the
Government’s privatisation of the probation service.
We are also committed to new rights for victims of crime. We will
introduce the country’s first ever Victims’ Law, with entitlements to
minimum standards of service.

LABOUR WILL:
•	 S
 crap Police and Crime Commissioners in order to protect
frontline police numbers.
•	 R
 aise policing standards with a new inspection and standards
body.
KEY FACTS
•	 N
 early 16,000 police officers have been lost under the Tory-led
Government, putting the safety of our communities at risk.
•	 T
 he number of rape, domestic violence, and child abuse cases
reported to the police is going up, but the number of cases
that they put forward for prosecution is plummeting.
34

Changing Britain Together

•	Establish a Commissioner to set minimum standards in
tackling domestic and sexual violence.
•	 R
 eform prisons, professionalising the workforce, stamping out
corruption and holding prisons to account on re-offending.
•	 E
 nact Britain’s first Victims’ Law to put victims at the heart of
justice system.
35

IMMIGRATION

LABOUR’S PLAN

Britain has benefited over many centuries from immigration. But it is
because immigration is so important that it needs to be controlled and its
impact properly managed.
The Tories have let people down on immigration. David Cameron
promised to get net migration down to the tens of thousands, but rather
than falling it has actually increased. Illegal immigration is also a growing
problem. Fewer people are being stopped at the border, more people
are absconding and fewer foreign criminals are being deported; yet the
government still has no way of properly tracking who is coming into the
country and who is leaving.
KEY FACTS
•	 N
 et migration is up to 260,000 a year – despite David Cameron’s
promise to “reduce net migration to tens of thousands”.
•	 T
 he Government is failing to enforce fair rules in our labour
market, which means cheap migrant labour is being used to
undercut workers’ wages.

Talking about immigration is not about pandering to the right. It is about
establishing a set of rules that are fair to those that come, and above all,
to those that are already here. Labour’s new approach is about controlling
immigration and its impacts on local communities.
A sense of fairness and community means ending the race to the bottom
on pay and conditions, that entitlements should be earned, and that people
should learn English and be part of our society.
There are three principles that will underpin our approach. First, we
need strong borders in order to control the pace of change – so we will
re-introduce exit checks and move towards counting people in and out.
Second, we will reform our economy so that it is less reliant on low skilled
migrant labour – with a crack down on exploitation and undercutting of
workers’ wages, with tougher enforcement of minimum wage laws. And
third, we will introduce measures to ensure migrants integrate and play
their part in our society, for example requiring all public sector workers in
public-facing roles to speak English, and introduce longer waiting periods
for out-of-work benefit; reform in-work benefits so that they aren’t
available until someone has contributed, and stop Child Benefit being sent
abroad.
LABOUR WILL:
•	 C
 ontrol immigration, with 1,000 new border staff and people
counted in and out.
•	 T
 ackle illegal immigration, reinstating fingerprint checks at
Calais and closing down student visitor visa loopholes.
•	 Ban recruitment agencies that only hire from overseas.
•	Ensure that EU migrants have to earn their entitlement to
benefits.
•	 R
 equire public sector workers in public facing roles to speak
English.

36

Changing Britain Together

37

CHILDCARE AND
THE EARLY YEARS

LABOUR’S PLAN

Too many families are faced with difficult choices about how they balance
work and family life. Some parents who want to work are being prevented
from doing so because the rising cost of childcare makes it unaffordable,
while others increasingly struggle to find good before- and after-school
placements.

More help with childcare is good for family life and good for the economy.
We know many parents would like to work, but childcare makes it
unaffordable. Making that choice a reality is why supporting families with
childcare is a priority for Labour, and why we will tackle the issues that are
putting family life under increasing pressure.

Under the current Government, the problem is getting worse.
Too many parents are struggling to cope as the cost of childcare soars
and availability falls. And David Cameron has broken his promise to
protect Sure Start, with 628 fewer Children’s Centres since 2010.

The next Labour Government will expand free childcare from 15 to 25
hours per week for working parents of three and four year-olds. To help
give parents of primary-aged children the peace of mind that comes from
knowing they can access childcare when they need it, Labour will also
introduce a legal guarantee of access to wraparound care from 8am to
6pm through their local school. We will restore early intervention at the
heart of our approach to supporting children and their parents, with Sure
Start playing a key role.

KEY FACTS
•	 C
 hildcare costs are up 30 per cent and the number of places
has fallen.
•	 There are 628 fewer Children’s Centres than in 2010.

LABOUR WILL:
•	 E
 xtend free childcare from 15 to 25 hours for working parents
with three and four-year-olds, paid for with an increase in the
bank levy.
•	 I ntroduce a legal guarantee that parents of primary-aged
children can access childcare from 8am to 6pm through their
local school.
•	 R
 einvigorate Sure Start, reforming the way local services work
together to shift from sticking-plaster services to radical early
help.
38

Changing Britain Together

39

RAISING SCHOOL
STANDARDS FOR ALL
Education standards have been undermined by the Tory-led Government.
From scrapping the requirement that teachers must be qualified, to
allowing underperformance in many schools to go unchallenged, the
schools system has been badly mishandled. Rather than focusing
on what really matters – the quality of teaching and learning in all of
England’s classrooms – they have focused only on a small number of Free
Schools and academies.
As a result, we have looming teacher shortages due to poor planning
and teachers leaving the profession, a primary school places crisis
made worse through money spent on opening Free Schools where
they’re not needed, and over 1.5 million children in schools that require
improvement. Meanwhile, the Government’s reforms have created
a dangerous lack of local oversight and accountability in our schools
system, meaning poor standards are going unnoticed for far too long.

LABOUR’S PLAN
Every child needs a good school, and every parent deserves the security
of knowing that their child is being taught by an excellent qualified
teacher. Parents also want the reassurance that comes from schools
being overseen locally and being accountable to their local community, to
help guarantee standards stay high.
Driving up standards means focusing on improving the quality of
teaching, not on what schools are called. So we will bring a relentless
focus on the quality of teaching – starting with reversing the Tories’
decision to allow schools to employ unqualified teachers.
Funding for additional school places should be prioritised in areas where
there are shortages, not for pet projects. So we will end the Tories’ flawed
Free Schools programme and give local communities a greater say in
where new schools are opened and in addressing underperforming
schools.

KEY FACTS
•	 T
 here are now 17,100 unqualified teachers in state-funded
schools.
•	 N
 early a third of Free Schools inspected have been judged
inadequate or requiring improvement, compared to one in five
for all state-funded schools.  

LABOUR WILL:
•	 G
 uarantee parents that all teachers in state schools will be
qualified.
•	 R
 equire teachers to continue building their skills and subject
knowledge on the job, with more high quality training and new
career paths.
•	 E
 nsure all schools are locally accountable with new local
Directors of School Standards responsible for intervening in
underperforming schools.
•	 E
 nd the flawed Free Schools programme and instead prioritise
new schools in areas where there are shortages of school
places.

40

Changing Britain Together

41

HANDING MORE POWER
TO COMMUNITIES
Britain is too centralised, and too many decisions affecting local
communities are made in Westminster. That means bad and often costly
decisions, but it also means that too many people do not see how they
can influence the things that matter to them – from their local high street,
to local bus routes, to how training supports local businesses.
Part of the crisis in confidence in our political system and institutions is
the distance people feel from the decisions that are taken on their behalf.
The Tory-led government, far from empowering local government, has
made sure that councils, especially those in the most deprived areas,
have borne the brunt of funding reductions.
KEY FACTS
•	 B
 etween 2010-11 and 2015-16 the ten most deprived areas will
have had their spending power cut by 16 times the amount of
the ten least deprived areas.
•	 T
 he number of payday loan firms on UK high streets rose by 20
per cent last year.

LABOUR’S PLAN
When we look around our communities, we see that real and lasting
change happens when people take control, especially when they come
together and act with others. It’s time that our political institutions stop
holding such progress back. Labour will put power in the hands of local
communities - empowering people to take more of their own decisions
alongside greater responsibility for delivering in their local area, giving
them freedom to address local priorities more efficiently and effectively.
We will also devolve billions in funding and business rates to England’s
powerhouse city and county regions, along with new powers including for
regional transport, putting regions in charge of their economies.
And as we look at each area of policy we will ask whether it could best be
addressed locally, and whether there is more we can do to give people
control over the things that matter to them. For example we will give fans
more control over their football clubs and communities more control over
their high streets, with powers to stop the spread of payday lenders and
to decide whether they want to limit the number of gambling or fast food
outlets.

LABOUR WILL:
•	 G
 ive football fans a voice in every club boardroom and the
right to buy a significant slice of their local football club if
ownership changes hands.
•	 G
 ive communities the power to limit the spread of payday
lenders and prevent their high streets from becoming
dominated by certain types of premises.
•	 G
 ive local areas across England London-style powers to set bus
routes and fares.
•	 D
 evolve to all parts of England, including the shires, not just
the Tories limited plans for a handful of big cities.
42

Changing Britain Together

43

POLITICAL REFORM
In every community, there are people who may have the vision and
capacity to change their neighbourhood, their country, even our whole
economy or society, for the better. But many of them may never get the
chance, or may never even cast a ballot. Too often all they have heard
about mainstream politics makes them feel that it is not for someone like
them.
When the Tory-led Government came to power in 2010, they promised
a fresh start and a different kind of politics. Yet four years on, the reality
is clear: instead of opening up politics, they have closed it down; instead
of reaching out, they have appealed to narrow, sectional interests as
they become more dependent on
funding from hedge funds and a small
number of rich donors. And whenever
they have been given an opportunity
to rebuild trust and restore faith in
our democracy, they have taken the
side of the powerful, rather than
the people. Their use of a Lobbying
Act to attempt to gag charities and
campaigners, and smear trade
unions, while letting powerful vested
interests off the hook, shows where
David Cameron’s priorities lie.
KEY FACTS
•	 7
 .5 million eligible voters are missing from the electoral
register, with a further 5.5 million at risk of dropping off due to
the reckless way the Government is implementing individual
electoral registration.
•	 L
 ess than 15 per cent of voters turned out for the 2012 Police
and Crime Commissioner elections.
44

Changing Britain Together

LABOUR’S PLAN
Too many people are struggling with a country that often feels like it
doesn’t work for them, and too many no longer believe that politics is the
answer to their problems. If we are not careful that will be the epitaph of
our time – that people stopped believing that politics could change their
lives for the better.
Ours is a mission to restore faith in our politics. We need to engage more
young people in politics and civic life, while achieving greater diversity
at all levels of governance. We aim to restore trust in Parliament and its
members, and reform the institutions of our politics to bring people in
not shut them out. And we will devolve power from Westminster down to
our nations, city and county regions, and to local communities.
LABOUR WILL:
•	 Give 16 and 17 year olds the vote.
•	 R
 epeal the Lobbying Act, and create a statutory register of
lobbyists.
•	 T
 ake the big money out of politics by capping individual
donations to parties.
•	 R
 eplace the House of Lords with a Senate of the Nations and
Regions.
•	 P
 ass an English Devolution Act, handing £30 billion of
resources, and powers over skills, transport, economic
development to city and county regions.
•	 I mplement the Smith Commission’s package of further
devolution to Scotland.
•	 P
 ut devolution to Wales on a stronger statutory basis, as in
Scotland.
•	 R
 eform the Commons to better hold the Government to
account and strengthen the public’s voice on legislation.
45

EQUALITIES

LABOUR’S PLAN

Under this Government, hard-won progress on people’s equalities is
being rolled back. Women, ethnic minorities and disabled have been
hit hardest by this Government, inequality in Britain is widening, and
social mobility has stalled with these groups still too often locked out of
positions of power.
A quarter of working women now earn less than the living wage and since
the introduction of Tribunal Fees the number of sex discrimination claims
has fallen by 91 per cent. The number of Black young people who’ve
been out of work for more than a year has risen by 46 per cent under this
Government.
KEY FACTS
•	 W
 omen are paid just 81p for every £1 earned by men, and
represent just 8.5 per cent of Executive Directors on Boards.
•	 T
 wo thirds of those hit by the bedroom tax are disabled or
have a disabled family member.
•	 T
 he number of young black people out of work for more than a
year has risen by 46 per cent.

The Labour Party has always led on challenging prejudice and
championing equality of opportunity. The next Labour Government
will carry on this proud tradition. Building a One Nation society means
ensuring each of us has the means to realise our true potential and to
live in dignity free from discrimination. Tackling low pay and eradicating
exploitative zero-hour contracts will disproportionately benefit the
women and ethnic minorities who dominate these jobs, and our
Youth Jobs Guarantee will help address the scandal of BAME youth
unemployment.
We will make delivering on the promise of gender equality a priority,
supporting women to balance work with caring commitments, promoting
flexible working and increasing pay transparency. We will put racial
equality back on the political agenda with a comprehensive race equality
strategy to challenge the barriers still faced by BAME communities,
and champion greater diversity across public life – driving better
representation across the police and judiciary, and in the company
boardroom. And we will build on our history of championing LGBT rights,
working with schools to tackle homophobic bullying and appointing the
first international envoy for LGBT rights to champion gay and transgender
rights internationally.

LABOUR WILL:
•	 Require large companies to publish their gender pay gap.
•	 Strengthen the law against maternity discrimination.
•	 Legislate to strengthen the law on transphobic hate crime.
•	 Establish a new offence of disability hate crime.
•	 Appoint an International Envoy for LGBT rights.
•	 D
 evelop and put in place a strategy for race equality at the
heart of Government.
46

Changing Britain Together

47

LEADING IN
THE WORLD

LABOUR’S PLAN

Globalisation has increased connectivity between countries and people,
as global challenges increasingly demand global solutions.
Instead of building upon Britain’s role in addressing global challenges,
David Cameron has been content to watch from the sidelines. Time and
again he has put his Party before his country – he is sleepwalking Britain
towards exit from the European Union, trying to keep his Party in line
while putting British jobs at risk.
Meanwhile, Britain’s commitment to climate change, human rights and
multilateral organisations has frequently fallen by the wayside, with a
reliance on the private sector for the delivery of development assistance
not being met with adequate levels of transparency and accountability.

The next Labour Government will put Britain back at the heart of
global affairs. We believe Britain must play a proactive role in tackling
international issues and we won’t shy away from the big challenges:
working to eliminate extreme poverty, supporting countries transitioning
to democracy, tackling terrorism and climate change.
With Labour, Britain will lead by example, working with our partners
worldwide to promote our values and defend our national interests. Only
by doing so can we hope to build a better, safer and more secure world.
And because Britain will be better off remaining at the heart of a
reformed EU, Labour will make the hard-headed, patriotic case both for
reform in Europe, not exit from Europe.

KEY FACTS
•	 O
 ver three million British jobs are linked to trade with the
European Union.
•	 A
 lmost half of the UK’s trade and foreign investment comes
from the European Union.

LABOUR WILL:
•	 W
 ork with our partners to reform the EU to make it work
better for Britain, reforming free movement so that people
coming to the UK have to wait longer to receive benefits and
making it easier to deport those who commit crimes.
•	 G
 uarantee no powers will be transferred to Brussels without
an in/out referendum.
•	 E
 nsure an outward-facing Britain, using our assets to amplify
our influence worldwide.
•	 L
 ead by example on human rights, upholding them
domestically through the Human Rights Act, and advocating
them overseas.
•	 P
 ut reducing inequality, climate change, and promoting
universal health care at the heart of international
development, pushing for an ambitious agreement in 2015.

48

Changing Britain Together

49

SECURITY, DEFENCE
AND SUPPORTING
OUR ARMED FORCES

We live in an insecure world, and inevitably face a complex range of
threats. Today’s threats differ from those we faced in the past. From
fragile and conflict-affected states, to natural disasters and humanitarian
crises, traditional military responses are no longer sufficient to counter
the most difficult security challenges of today.
However, the Government’s 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review
was a missed opportunity. Instead of asking what could be done to meet
our strategic security goals, it began by asking what could be cut, resulting
in gaps in our military capacity and failing our armed forces. Meanwhile,
David Cameron has diminished many of the European mechanisms which
enable us to effectively fight cross-border crime.
KEY FACTS
•	 B
 otched defence procurement under David Cameron’s watch
has cost the taxpayer tens of millions of pounds.
•	 T
 he trained strength of the Army Reserve rose by only 20
between 2013 and 2014 despite the Government’s costly
recruitment campaign.

LABOUR’S PLAN
In an uncertain landscape, our defence and security policies need to
offer certainty and stability. In this economic climate we will have to be
strategic with the defence budget and work closely with our allies if we
are to achieve our aims. We want to see a strong, high-tech Armed Forces
equipped for the challenges of the 21st Century with an ability to tackle
emerging, interconnected threats.
At the core of Labour’s defence policy is supporting our Forces, veterans
and their families who have sacrificed so much to protect our country.
The next Labour Government will also strengthen cross-border
collaboration on crime and justice. We believe cooperation with our
friends on crime and intelligence is vital to making Britain’s streets safer.
We want to see a proper framework for police forces to work together
across borders and we will continue to support the European Arrest
Warrant which has brought so many criminals to justice.

LABOUR WILL:
•	 C
 onduct a Strategic Defence and Security Review in 2015 to
equip our Armed Forces to meet the most difficult modern
security challenges.
•	 F
 urther Britain’s defence cooperation with NATO and
European partners, particularly in training and procurement.
•	 I ntroduce legislation to outlaw the discrimination and abuse
of members of the Armed Forces.
•	 S
 upport the creation of an Armed Forces credit union,
addressing the specific needs of Forces families.
•	 S
 upport pan-European measures for cooperation on crime,
including the European Arrest Warrant.

50

Changing Britain Together

51

WE WANT TO
HEAR FROM YOU
The policy programme summarised in this document is the product of
Agenda 2015 and Labour’s Policy Review. To reach this point, we have
spoken with many thousands of people – Party members, affiliates,
businesses, charities and members of the public. We have listened in our
communities, on the doorstep, in our workplaces, and through our policy
development website, yourbritain.org.uk.
Our work is not yet finished, and as we begin to prepare our manifesto,
we want to hear your views on our programme, what the challenges we
face mean to you, and your hopes and expectations of the next Labour
Government.

To join the conversation about our priorities for Britain,
visit labour.org.uk/changingbritaintogether
This booklet represents a summary of some of the key policies developed
through Labour’s policy making process, Agenda 2015, and agreed as
part of Labour’s policy programme by the National Policy Forum and
Annual Conference 2014. To read Labour’s policy programme in full visit
yourbritain.org.uk/agenda-2015/npf-annual-report-2014.

52

Changing Britain Together

54

Changing Britain Together

55

6552_14 Reproduced from electronic media, promoted by Iain McNicol,
General Secretary, the Labour Party, on behalf of the Labour Party,
both at One Brewer’s Green, London SW1H 0RH.

