The parties’ published
proposals on further
devolution for Scotland

October 2014

The parties’ published
proposals on further
devolution for Scotland

Presented to Parliament
by the Secretary of State for Scotland
by Command of Her Majesty
October 2014

Cm 8946

© Crown copyright 2014
You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or
medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence v.2. To view this licence,
visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/2/ or e-mail:
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk Where third party material has been identified,
permission from the respective copyright holder must be sought.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at:
Cabinet Office
1 Horse Guards Road,
London
SW1A 2HQ
Print ISBN 9781474111119
Web ISBN 9781474111126
Printed in the UK by The Williams Lea Group on behalf of the Controller of
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID SDG006449  10/14
Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

Contents

Introduction5
Chapter 1	The commitment to deliver
further devolution

9

Chapter 2	 Background: Devolution in Scotland

11

Chapter 3	 Further devolution proposals
	
3.1	 Taxation, funding and borrowing
	
3.2	 Constitutional affairs

15
16
23

Chapter 4	
	
	
	
	
	

29
29
33
37
42
44

Additional proposals
4.1	 Taxation, funding and borrowing
4.2	Welfare
4.3	Regulation
4.4	 Constitutional affairs
4.5	 Other proposals	

Introduction

The Edinburgh Agreement set out the process for a legal, fair and decisive referendum capable
of producing an outcome respected by all sides on the question of Scottish independence.
On 18 September 2014, the people of Scotland made a positive choice to remain part of
the United Kingdom (UK). Looking towards a shared future together, the UK Government is
committed to ensuring that institutional and constitutional structures continue to deliver for
everyone across the UK.
On 19 September 2014 the Prime Minister said “we have delivered on devolution under this
Government, and we will do so again in the next Parliament. The three pro-union parties have
made commitments, clear commitments, on further powers for the Scottish Parliament. We will
ensure that they are honoured in full”.1
Right from the outset, the Coalition Government has demonstrated its commitment to further
devolution of powers across the UK – from the Wales Bill to the City Deals agreed up and down
the country. The UK Government recognised the desire for a greater degree of fiscal autonomy
in Scotland and that has been delivered through the Scotland Act 2012.
The UK Government believes passionately in the UK and recognises the benefits it brings to all
of its citizens. For over 300 years the UK has brought people together in the most successful
multi-nation state the world has ever known. To ensure this continues into the future the UK
Government must listen to proposals for change and challenge the way the Government and its
institutions deliver for the public.
It is in this spirit that this Command Paper sets out the three main UK parties’ published
proposals on further devolution in Scotland. In doing so, the UK Government absolutely
recognises that any changes to the relationship between the UK and Scottish Parliaments will
have wider implications for the constitutional settlement across the UK, and that these will need
to be considered in the round.

The proposals in this paper
During the course of the referendum campaign all three pro-UK political parties committed to a
timetable on agreeing further powers for the Scottish Parliament, concluding with the publication
of draft clauses in January 2015.
That timetable committed the UK Government to the publication of a Command Paper by the
end of October 2014 that would summarise the parties’ individual proposals. This document
fulfils that commitment.
	https://www.gov.uk/government/news/scottish-independence-referendum-statement-by-the-prime-minister

1

6 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

The Scottish National Party and the Scottish Green Party have agreed to join the cross-party
talks. The Scottish Government published proposals for submission to the Smith Commission
on 10 October 2014, and the Scottish National Party has endorsed those proposals. The
Scottish Green Party published its proposals for submission to the Commission on 10 October
2014. The Commission will rightly assess and take all of these into account as part of a
consensus-building process on agreeing proposals for more powers. This document is entirely
without prejudice to that work.
Those proposals, and those made by the Conservative, Liberal Democrat and Labour parties,
can be found at:
Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party: Commission on the Future Governance of Scotland
Scottish Liberal Democrats: Federalism: the best future for Scotland
Scottish Labour Party: Powers for a purpose – Strengthening Accountability and
Empowering People
Scottish National Party: More powers for the Scottish Parliament
Scottish Green Party: Scottish Green Party submission to Smith Commission on Devolution

Chapter 1:
The commitment to deliver further
devolution
On 19 September 2014 the Smith Commission, chaired by Lord Smith of Kelvin,
was established as a fully independent body to facilitate talks on the devolution of further
powers to the Scottish Parliament. The Smith Commission, whose Terms of Reference can be
found at http://www.smith-commission.scot, will publish its Heads of Agreement in November
this year. In parallel, the UK Government has agreed to:
•	 set out the range of proposals that have been made on further devolution;
•	 provide secretariat support to the parties’ discussions and to wider consultation on
those proposals; and
•	 respond to the Smith Commission’s Heads of Agreement. The UK Government’s
response will take the shape of draft legislative proposals accompanied by an
explanatory text in January 2015. These will form the basis of a Scotland Bill to be
brought forward by the next UK Government in the new Parliament.
This Command Paper fulfils the first of those commitments by setting out the published
proposals by the three main UK political parties that have already been put forward for
further devolution.

Chapter 2:
Background: Devolution in Scotland

Devolution in Scotland is not a new creation – from the outset of the Union, a unique set of
Scottish institutions and systems continued to exist and flourish within the UK including the
Scottish education system, the Church of Scotland and Scots law and legal system. The
principle of administrative devolution was established in Scotland in 1885 with the creation
of the Scottish Office. A little over a hundred years later in 1989 the Scottish Constitutional
Convention, made up of representatives from civic Scotland and some of the political parties,
came into being. In 1995 the Convention drew up a detailed blueprint for devolution including
proposals for a directly elected Scottish Parliament with wide legislative powers. This formed
the basis of further proposals which were brought forward by the UK Government and received
overwhelming support in a referendum on 11 September 1997. As a result the UK Government
brought forward the Scotland Act 1998 that established the Scottish Executive (now Scottish
Government) and Scottish Parliament in 1999.
This Government has continued to support devolution to Scotland through the Scotland Act
2012, which implements many of the recommendations of the Calman Commission.1 During
the passage of the Scotland Act 2012, the UK Government set out three devolution principles.
These were that any proposal should:
	

1.	have cross-party support;

	

2.	be based on evidence; and

	

3.	not be to the detriment of other parts of the UK.

The Scotland Act 2012 and previous devolution of powers on spending and taxation did not
confer any systematic financial gain or loss to either Scotland or the rest of the UK. The Scotland
Act 2012 provides the Scottish Parliament with increased responsibility for raising revenue, as
well as making decisions about how it is spent. Together, these changes mean that the Scottish
Parliament will be responsible for funding around a third of devolved spending – roughly double
the amount it currently funds. These additional powers include a new Scottish rate of Income
Tax, which will allow the Scottish Government to decide the rate of tax that people in Scotland
pay. In addition, powers are on the way to enable the Scottish Government to issue its own
bonds and borrow for capital investment.

	 The Commission was established in 2008 by the UK Government in response to a motion passed by the
Scottish Parliament. It was set up and supported by all three main parties at the UK Parliament (who formed
the Opposition in the Scottish Parliament) in response to the establishment by the Scottish Government of a
‘national conversation’ about the future of Scotland.

1

12 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

Further information on devolution in Scotland and details of which powers are reserved and
devolved can be found here: https://www.gov.uk/devolution-of-powers-to-scotland-wales-andnorthern-ireland.
In the referendum on Scottish independence held on 18 September 2014, the Scottish people
made a positive choice to remain in the UK. The UK Government is clear that the Scottish
people did not vote to maintain the status quo and all the parties represented at the Scottish
Parliament have agreed to enter into talks aimed at agreeing proposals for further devolution
to Scotland.
The devolution settlements in the UK have evolved in different ways with each responding to
the particular circumstances of time and place. That is not to say that the devolution of powers
can or should be considered in isolation and any change, including forthcoming proposals for
Scotland, will necessarily have a wider impact on the UK constitutional settlement.

Chapter 3:
Further devolution proposals

Prior to the referendum the Scottish Conservatives, the Scottish Liberal Democrats and Scottish
Labour all published proposals for the devolution of further powers to Scotland. These three
sets of proposals can be read here:
Scottish Conservatives and Unionist Party: Commission on the Future Governance of Scotland
Scottish Liberal Democrats: Federalism: the best future for Scotland
Scottish Labour Party: Powers for a purpose – Strengthening Accountability and Empowering
People
In addition to the specific proposals already published in the reports above, the three main UK
politcial parties are fully engaged with the Smith Commission to consider the range of proposals
and to achieve cross-party agreement on recommendations for further devolution of powers to
the Scottish Parliament. This Chapter covers the policy areas where all three of these parties
have produced proposals. Some of these three parties have put forward additional proposals in
a number of policy areas and these proposals are detailed in Chapter 4 of this paper. In some
areas proposals have only been put forward by one (or two) of the three parties; however, at this
stage silence on a specific area by one or more parties cannot be taken as indication of either
agreement or disagreement with devolution in that area. Further responses and proposals are
likely to emerge from these three parties, as well as the Scottish National Party and the Scottish
Green party, as the Commission’s work progresses.
As previous devolution settlements have shown, decisions in one area can have a direct,
complex and intricate impact on many others. For example, increased tax-raising powers for
the Scottish Parliament would impact upon macro-economic policies. The proposals gathered
together here should be considered in light of the broader impact they may have on a broad
range of diverse policy areas, for example across issues including the labour market, spending
and regulation. Furthermore, the effect of implementing multiple changes, as proposed
by all three parties, would be different and likely greater than the effect of implementing
individual changes.
Any balanced package of measures to be devolved must consider the interaction between
its elements and the associated impact on both the UK and Scottish Parliaments’ ability to
effectively discharge their duties. The UK Government believes that the devolution principles
underpinning the Scotland Act 2012 continue to hold true and should be part of the
considerations of the Chair of the Smith Commission and the parties. There are also valuable
international lessons on fiscal and other devolution which can inform any work on further
devolution and these will be an important part of any devolution considerations.

16 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

The UK Government believes in a fair and balanced settlement for Scotland. This means that –
consistent with the process that underpinned the Scotland Act 2012 – it is anticipated that any
further devolution of powers should not of itself confer any systematic financial gain or loss to
either Scotland or the rest of the UK or the UK as a whole. This protects both Scotland and the
rest of the UK.
The people of Scotland voted by a clear majority for Scotland to remain within the UK.
Proposals to strengthen the Scottish Parliament provide an opportunity to reach a strong and
lasting constitutional settlement across the UK.

3.1 Taxation, funding and borrowing
The UK currently has an integrated tax system, meaning the same taxes generally apply across
the UK. This provides an effective base for collection of tax revenues across the UK. The
Scottish Parliament is responsible for Council Tax and non-domestic (business) rates, which
usually fund slightly more than ten per cent of the spending for which it is responsible (i.e. the
spending by the Scottish Government and Scottish Local Authorities).
The core of the Scottish Government’s funding is the ‘block grant’ allocated by the UK
Government. Changes to the block grant allocations are largely determined by the Barnett
Formula which provides a population-based share of changes in comparable spending by UK
Government departments.
Through the Scotland Act 2012 the UK Government devolved certain tax powers to the Scottish
Parliament. Stamp Duty Land Tax and Landfill Tax are being fully devolved from April 2015 and a
Scottish rate of Income Tax is being created from April 2016.
Alongside these tax powers, the Act also provides the Scottish Government with commensurate
capital borrowing powers to support further investment in infrastructure.
The UK Government announced in February 2014 that it is granting the Scottish Government
the ability to issue its own bonds. This will broaden the sources of financing available to
the Scottish Government for capital investment when borrowing powers are implemented
in 2015‑16.
Under the Scotland Act 2012, the Scottish Government is able to borrow up to a total
of £2.2 billion for capital investment via the National Loans Fund and commercial loans.
The power announced in February 2014 provides an additional source of borrowing within the
same limits.

Chapter 3: Further devolution proposals 17

The Scotland Act 2012 tax and borrowing powers1
From Royal Assent (May 2012):
•	 existing UK-wide taxes can be devolved and/or new Scottish taxes can be created by
order-making process in both the UK and Scottish Parliaments.
From April 2015:
•	 full devolution of Stamp Duty Land Tax and Landfill Tax;
•	 borrowing powers for capital spending set at an additional ten per cent of the Scottish
Government’s capital Departmental Expenditure Limits budget each year (which equates
to capital borrowing of £296 million in 2015-16 as set out in the recent Spending Round)
within an overall limit of £2.2 billion;
•	 the Scottish Government can utilise a cash reserve if devolved tax receipts are lower
than forecast. In addition to using an element of devolved tax revenues to build up the
reserve, the Scottish Government can also make discretionary payments from their
existing budgets (from June 2011 to June 2016) in order to support the transition to the
new system; and
•	 borrowing powers for current spending if devolved tax receipts are lower than forecast
and there are insufficient funds in the cash reserve to cover the shortfall. This is limited to
£200 million per year up to an overall limit of £500 million.
From April 2016:
•	 Income Tax will be partially devolved. Each of the UK rates (basic, higher and additional)
is to be reduced by 10 pence in the pound for Scottish tax-payers, and will be replaced
by a single Scottish rate of Income Tax applying to non-savings income set annually by
the Scottish Parliament. There will be a two or three year transitional period during which
the UK Government will retain the forecasting risk.

European Union rules
Under European Union (EU) rules, generally, a tax measure that only applies to one region
will be considered a State aid. However, the devolution of taxes is not considered to be an
aid if the regional authority demonstrates sufficient autonomy, known as the Azores Criteria.
This means that a devolved tax will not be an aid if the block grant is adjusted so that any tax
cut is not supported by central government, and the authority has control over the tax. This
does not necessarily require the devolution of entire control over the tax. The powers over
tax that have already been devolved to Scotland are compliant with the Azores Criteria. Any
further devolution of tax would also have to be compliant.

	 Scotland analysis: Macroeconomic and fiscal performance, HM Government, September 2013

1

18 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

Tax devolution
The different elements of the tax system are interrelated, so tax devolution options need to be
considered in the context of a particular fiscal framework.
On previous occasions where a revenue stream has been devolved (such as under the Scotland
Act 2012) this has involved adjusting Scotland’s block grant funding from the UK Government
to account for the fact that they have new revenue raising powers and some tax has been
foregone by the UK Government.
There are, in principle, a number of ways of devolving a particular tax:
•	 full devolution (i.e. taxpayers are required to register and file tax returns in each
jurisdiction);
•	 tax base set at national level but rates can be varied sub-nationally;
•	 tax rates set at national level but bases can be varied sub-nationally (by varying reliefs
and allowances); or
•	 no devolution of the tax base or tax rates but sharing of revenue between national and
sub-national governments (sometimes referred to as ‘revenue assignment’).
At the individual tax level, there are a number of possible criteria that could be used when
considering the merits of devolving a particular tax. For example, the Silk Commission2 used:
•	 Accountability: Is the tax paid in the devolved territory; would devolving it strengthen
accountability for raising revenue from that tax?
•	 Economic efficiency: Would devolution of a tax provide taxpayers with strong
incentives to alter their behaviour just to reduce their tax burden?
•	 Administrative efficiency: Would devolution of a particular tax impose substantial
additional administrative burdens on citizens or firms or increase the cost of collection
unreasonably?
•	 Policy relevance: Would the tax be useful as a policy lever to change behaviour
(e.g. environmental taxes)?
•	 Legal constraints: Would devolution of a tax be consistent with European law or
other international agreements?
•	 Impact on the UK tax base: Would devolving the tax increase risks to the UK
tax base?
Such criteria do not, of course, give a unique, objective answer as to which taxes should
be devolved.
The three parties have set out individual proposals for further devolution of powers to the
Scottish Parliament related to taxation, funding and borrowing. These cut across a range of
policy areas with some overlap between the parties’ proposals. The section below details the
specific proposals alongside the current situation in each of these areas.

	 The Commission on Devolution in Wales, also known as the Silk Commission, was launched in 2011. The
independent Commission was established to review financial and constitutional arrangements in Wales.
The Silk Commission’s report on fiscal matters was published on 19 November 2012 and can be read here:
http://commissionondevolutioninwales.independent.gov.uk

2

Chapter 3: Further devolution proposals 19

Income Tax
Current situation
Income Tax is charged on an individual’s income above their personal allowance, at a series of
rates which are determined by thresholds and the nature of the income.
The Scotland Act 1998 introduced the Scottish Variable Rate (SVR) which allows the Scottish
Parliament to vary the basic rate of Income Tax by up to three percentage points from the UK
rate. This applies to the non-savings income of Scottish taxpayers, but has never been used by
the Scottish Parliament.
From April 2016, the SVR will be replaced by a new Scottish rate of Income Tax, as described
above. The personal allowance, thresholds and the rates on non-savings income will remain at
UK Government-set levels.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘…the Scottish Parliament should be responsible for setting the
rates and bands of personal income tax in Scotland…This does not mean that the United
Kingdom Government would have no role as regards income tax paid by Scottish taxpayers.
The definition of ‘income’ for the purposes of the Taxes Acts should remain consistent across
the United Kingdom, for example. Likewise, income tax on investments, dividends and savings
should remain a matter for UK Ministers, for practical reasons and in order to safeguard the
integrity of the UK’s single market in financial services. We also consider that allowances such
as personal allowance – i.e. the threshold at which income becomes taxable – should continue
to be set for the whole of the UK by the UK Government. But, beyond these fundamentals, the
key decisions as to the rates at which the income of Scots should be taxed and income tax
banding should be for the Scottish Parliament’.
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Income tax paid by Scottish taxpayers should be almost entirely
the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament’. ‘Income tax payable on savings and dividends
should continue to be levied on a uniform basis across the UK, be deducted at source and a
proportion of the UK receipts allocated to the Scottish Parliament’.
Labour commission: ‘We will widen the variation in income tax in the Scotland Act by half from
10p to 15p. It will mean that three-quarters of the basic rate income tax in Scotland will be under
the control of the Scottish Parliament. The Scotland Act enables the Scottish Parliament to
increase or decrease income tax rates in Scotland. In addition to extending this power, we will
also introduce new Scottish Progressive Rates of Income Tax, so that the Scottish Parliament
can increase the rates of tax in the higher and additional bands. For the first time, the Scottish
Parliament will be able to alter both the level of tax and the progressivity of the tax system, but
without the risk that a Scottish Government could force tax competition within the UK by cutting
only the top rates, to the detriment of public services. Labour in the Scottish Parliament would
be able to use these powers if a UK Government did not set fair taxes at these levels’.

20 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

Inheritance Tax
Current situation
Inheritance Tax is charged on death and on certain lifetime transfers if the value of the estates or
transfer is above a threshold or ‘nil rate band’. Inheritance Tax is not devolved and is set by the
UK Government.
There are also two schemes which operate under UK legislation with reference to Inheritance
Tax. The Acceptance-in-Lieu Scheme enables taxpayers to transfer works of art and other
heritage objects into public ownership in lieu of paying Inheritance Tax. The legislative provisions
for this are set out in the National Heritage Act 1980 and the Inheritance Tax Act 1984. The
Cultural Gifts Scheme allows individuals or companies to gift pre-eminent cultural objects to the
nation in exchange for tax reductions. The legislative provision for this is set out in Schedule 14
to the Finance Act 2012.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘We do not recommend the devolution to the Scottish Parliament of
Corporation Tax, Capital Gains Tax (‘CGT’) or Inheritance Tax (‘IHT’). Each of these taxes should
remain the responsibility of the United Kingdom’.
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Control of the Inheritance Tax should be allocated to the
Scottish Parliament’.
Labour commission: ‘We concluded that, for a variety of good reasons, VAT, national insurance
contributions, corporation tax, alcohol, tobacco and fuel duties, climate change levy, insurance
premium tax, vehicle excise duty, inheritance tax, capital gains tax and tax on oil receipts should
remain reserved’.
Capital Gains Tax
Current situation
The UK Parliament has the power to set Capital Gains Tax (CGT) rates. CGT is currently levied at
28 per cent for UK higher rate Income Tax payers and 18 per cent for UK basic rate tax payers,
on gains above an Annual Exempt Amount of £11,000.
Primary residences are exempt from CGT through Private Residence Relief. In addition,
Entrepreneurs’ Relief offers investors and business owners a ten per cent CGT rate on up to
£10 million of qualifying gains.
There are other reliefs and exemptions relating to disposals of certain business investments,
employee share ownership and savings. 
CGT is not devolved and is set by the UK Government.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘We do not recommend the devolution to the Scottish Parliament of
Corporation Tax, Capital Gains Tax (‘CGT’) or Inheritance Tax (‘IHT’). Each of these taxes should
remain the responsibility of the United Kingdom’.
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Powers over Capital Gains Tax should be allocated to the
Scottish Parliament’.
Labour commission: ‘We concluded that, for a variety of good reasons, VAT, national insurance
contributions, corporation tax, alcohol, tobacco and fuel duties, climate change levy, insurance
premium tax, vehicle excise duty, inheritance tax, capital gains tax and tax on oil receipts should
remain reserved’.

Chapter 3: Further devolution proposals 21

National Insurance Contributions
Current situation
National Insurance contributions (NICs) are charged on the earnings of employees, employers
and the self-employed. Most NICs receipts are paid into the National Insurance Fund and this
is used to fund contributory benefits such as the State Pension. The National Insurance Fund
operates on a ‘pay as you go’ basis, i.e. this year’s contributions pay for this year’s benefits.
NICs are not devolved although Northern Ireland has its own National Insurance Fund.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘…we do not consider that national insurance should be devolved’.
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Powers over the National Insurance system should be allocated
to the UK, and subsequently federal level of government’.
Labour commission: ‘We concluded that, for a variety of good reasons, VAT, national insurance
contributions, corporation tax, alcohol, tobacco and fuel duties, climate change levy, insurance
premium tax, vehicle excise duty, inheritance tax, capital gains tax and tax on oil receipts should
remain reserved’.
Air Passenger Duty
Current Situation
Air Passenger Duty (APD) is an excise duty which is levied on the carriage of chargeable
passengers from a UK airport on chargeable aircraft. APD was extended to smaller aircraft
including business jets in April 2013. This includes all flights on aircraft with an authorised takeoff weight of 5.7 tonnes or more. The higher rate of APD applies to flights on aircraft of over 20
tonnes but with fewer than 19 seats. 
APD is compliant with the UK’s international legal obligations under the Chicago Convention on
International Civil Aviation and the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU.
APD rates are set by the UK Government. However, the Finance Act 2012 devolved to the
Northern Ireland Assembly (NIA) the power to set APD rates on direct long haul flights from
Northern Ireland. With effect from 1 January 2013, the NIA legislated to set these devolved
rates at £0. Northern Ireland’s direct long-haul flight rate is administered on the Northern Ireland
Executive’s behalf by the UK’s tax authority, HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC).
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘…we consider that Air Passenger Duty should be devolved…In our
judgement there is no need for fresh legislation in order to allow this to occur’.
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Responsibility for Air Passenger Duty for flights from Scottish
airports should be allocated to the Scottish Parliament, to complement existing powers on the
environment, transport and economic development’.
Labour commission: ‘Our interim report considered whether there was scope for devolution
of air passenger duty, subject particularly to EU rules. We received a number of considered
representations, and continue to note that departures from Highlands and Islands airports are
already exempt from this tax. Given the pressure to reduce this tax from airlines and others and
the risk of tax competition which would be created, we are not now convinced that devolution
should be progressed until further consideration is given to the environmental impact and how
else this tax might be reformed’.

22 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

Value Added Tax
Current Situation
Value Added Tax (VAT) must, as a requirement of EU law, be levied at a single rate for each
particular good or service and that rate must apply across the territory of a Member State.3
The power to set VAT rates therefore rests with the UK Parliament. The UK VAT standard rate
is currently set at 20 per cent, with reduced rates (including a zero rate) for some goods and
services (such as food and children’s clothes). Whilst devolution of the tax is not possible a
reassignment of VAT receipts could be achieved.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘Were it not illegal under EU law, we would have been inclined to
recommend that VAT be devolved to the Scottish Parliament. However we recommend that, as
an alternative, there should be serious examination of the case for a share of VAT receipts raised
in Scotland being assigned to the Scottish Parliament’.
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘VAT and customs and excise duties on alcohol and tobacco
should naturally remain the responsibility of the UK Parliament’.
Labour commission: ‘We concluded that, for a variety of good reasons, VAT, national insurance
contributions, corporation tax, alcohol, tobacco and fuel duties, climate change levy, insurance
premium tax, vehicle excise duty, inheritance tax, capital gains tax and tax on oil receipts should
remain reserved’.
Corporation Tax
Current Situation
Corporation Tax policy – including rates, allowances and reliefs – is currently set by the UK
Government and is not devolved. 
The Prime Minister has publicly committed to deciding by Autumn Statement 2014 whether
the power to set the Corporation Tax rate in Northern Ireland should be devolved to the
Northern Ireland Assembly. 
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘We do not recommend the devolution to the Scottish Parliament of
Corporation Tax, Capital Gains Tax (‘CGT’) or Inheritance Tax (‘IHT’). Each of these taxes should
remain the responsibility of the United Kingdom’.
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Corporation Tax should continue to be operated and collected
at the UK level, but the proceeds raised in Scotland should be assigned to the Scottish
Parliament’.
Labour commission: ‘We concluded that, for a variety of good reasons, VAT, national insurance
contributions, corporation tax, alcohol, tobacco and fuel duties, climate change levy, insurance
premium tax, vehicle excise duty, inheritance tax, capital gains tax and tax on oil receipts should
remain reserved’.

	 Council Directive 2006/112/EC of 28 November 2006 on the common system of value added tax

3

Chapter 3: Further devolution proposals 23

Excise Duties
Current Situation
EU law determines the structure of and sets minimum rates for alcohol, tobacco and fuel duties
and for some elements of vehicle excise duty. Member States have freedom to determine
their excise duty system subject to these constraints. The power currently rests with the
UK Parliament.
EU law permits regional rates via specific derogations. However, certain criteria would need to
be met and the structure and rates would still need to comply with EU law.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘Air Passenger Duty; Climate Change Levy; Excise, Fuel and Vehicle
Duties, etc…These are relatively minor taxes, responsible between them for raising less than
10 per cent of tax revenues in the UK. Even if they were devolved in their entirety this would
make only a modest contribution to the task of closing the ‘fiscal gap’. Some of these taxes
and duties relate to activity that is highly mobile (e.g. fuel duty and betting duties) and are for
this reason unsuitable for devolution. The devolution of alcohol and tobacco duty, leading
to the possibility of differential rates in different parts of the UK, could trigger an increase in
illicit trafficking’.
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘VAT and customs and excise duties on alcohol and tobacco
should naturally remain the responsibility of the UK Parliament’. Fuel duty and vehicle excise
duty are not specifically referenced.
Labour commission: ‘We concluded that, for a variety of good reasons, VAT, national insurance
contributions, corporation tax, alcohol, tobacco and fuel duties, climate change levy, insurance
premium tax, vehicle excise duty, inheritance tax, capital gains tax and tax on oil receipts should
remain reserved’.

3.2 Constitutional affairs
The Scottish Parliament was established by the Scotland Act 1998, which also sets out its
structure and rules – including aspects such as membership, methods of election and the need
for a Presiding Officer. Under devolution, the Scottish Parliament has responsibility for matters
that are not explicitly reserved to the UK Parliament.
While the UK Parliament retains the power to legislate in all areas, the UK Parliament does
not normally legislate in relation to devolved matters except with the consent of the Scottish
Parliament. This is known as the Sewel Convention – this Convention has been upheld since the
Scottish Parliament was established fifteen years ago.
As the constitution of the UK is generally a reserved matter under the 1998 Act, the Scottish
Parliament itself is unable to make fundamental changes (for example introducing a second
chamber) to its own structure. The Scotland Act 1998 does however allow that the Scottish
Parliaments’ proceedings be regulated by standing orders for which it has responsibility.
Orders under the 1998 Act play an important part of the working of governance in Scotland.
For example, they have often been used to ensure that Scottish Parliament legislation can be
given full effect by making changes to legislation for other parts of the UK or in reserved areas.
However, many of the processes underpinning devolution are not set out in legislation. The
Sewel Convention, for example, is one of the most important of these.

24 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

The three parties have set out their proposals for constitutional changes under further devolution
proposals. The section below details the specific proposals alongside the current situation in
each of these areas.
Civil Service
Current Situation
The Civil Service is reserved in England, Scotland and Wales and devolved in Northern Ireland.
Senior Civil Servants are encouraged to seek experience of working within different
departments.
HMRC is a non-ministerial Department established by the Commissioners for Revenue and
Customs Act 2005 (CRCA), replacing the Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise. CRCA
vests responsibility for the collection of revenue and the administration of the tax system in
Commissioners appointed by Her Majesty the Queen. The Commissioners are members of
the Department’s Executive Committee. HMRC reports to the UK Parliament at Accounting
Officer level though the Permanent Secretary, and through HM Treasury Ministers as one of
the Chancellor’s Departments. As part of the implementation of the Scotland Act 2012 HMRC
has appointed an Accounting Officer with responsibility for the operation of the Scottish rate
of Income Tax who reports regularly to the Scottish Parliament. HMRC has no specific or
protected constitutional status.
The Secretary of State for Scotland is a full member of the Cabinet of the UK Government and
attends all meetings of Cabinet. There are no plans to review the role of the Scotland Office.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘We believe that the Scottish Government and Parliament should be
able to call upon the best and brightest from across the Civil Service UK wide. We also believe
that the rest of the UK would benefit from a Scottish view and accordingly recommend that
civil servants who expect to reach the higher echelons of their profession in Scotland should
spend a part of their career development in other parts of the UK. The Civil Service should
operate a scheme to ensure that not only is this possible but attractive for Scots to spend time
in Departments of State outside Scotland’.
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘The status and functions of certain UK-wide institutions
– notably Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs – should be given a protected and more
independent constitutional position in recognition of the fact that they will be expected to
serve all parliaments and jurisdictions within the UK. The role of the Scotland Office should be
reviewed as the United Kingdom moves towards a federal union. Until the move to a federal
state is well underway the Scotland Office should remain as Scotland will need the safeguard of
a Secretary of State in Cabinet to look after its interests during the transition’.
Labour commission: ‘The following matters should remain reserved as they are key to the
maintenance of the union…The civil service should remain’.

Chapter 3: Further devolution proposals 25

Parliaments/Assemblies: relationships and powers
Current Situation
The UK and Scottish Governments are committed to the principles of working together on
matters of mutual interest, and to good communication and mutual respect. They work
together long before a bill enters Parliament or in routine policy issues where no legislation is
required. These principles are set out in the Memorandum of Understanding between the UK
Government and the devolved administrations first published in 1999, and regularly updated.4
There is currently no committee which considers the developing role of the UK, its Parliaments
and Assemblies. It is a matter for the Parliaments and Assemblies as to whether one should
be established.
There are three legal jurisdictions in the UK: the Scottish legal system is separate to the
jurisdiction of England and Wales and that of Northern Ireland.
The Supreme Court:
•	 is the final court of appeal for all UK civil cases, and criminal cases from England,
Wales and Northern Ireland;
•	 hears appeals on arguable points of law of general public importance;
•	 concentrates on cases of the greatest public and constitutional importance; and
•	 maintains and develops the role of the highest court in the UK as a leader in the
common law world.
As regards devolution issues, the Scotland Act 1998 (the 1998 Act) created a right of review
for the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in relation to ‘devolution issues’. This jurisdiction
was transferred to the Supreme Court upon the court’s creation in 2009. The Lord Advocate,
the Attorney General, the Advocate General for Scotland or the Advocate General for Northern
Ireland may refer a devolution issue to the Supreme Court. ‘Devolution issues’ may arise in civil
or criminal cases, though some of what were previously devolution issues in criminal cases have
now become ‘compatibility issues’ under the 2012 Act. Compatibility issues may be referred to
the High Court of Justiciary or the Supreme Court.
A party may appeal to the Supreme Court against a determination of a devolution issue by the
Court of Session or the High Court of Justiciary sitting in their appellate capacities in civil and
criminal cases respectively. Such an appeal requires permission from those courts, failing which,
permission of the Supreme Court. The Court of Session or the High Court of Justiciary may also
refer a devolution issue which arises in proceedings before them to the Supreme Court.  Further,
the Lord Advocate, the Attorney General, the Advocate General for Scotland or the Advocate
General for Northern Ireland may require any court to refer to the Supreme Court any devolution
issue which has arisen in proceedings before it to which they are a party.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘…the Sewel Convention (Holyrood giving formal consent to
Westminster legislation affecting Scotland) is a mechanism that is used frequently, but few
other formalised relationships between the two Parliaments exist. The Calman Commission
recommended a joint liaison committee be established and we believe this proposal should be
re-examined after the General Election…As a final recommendation, we therefore call for the
creation of a Committee of all the Parliaments and Assemblies of the UK’.
	https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/316157/MoU_between_the_
UK_and_the_Devolved_Administrations.pdf

4

26 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

Liberal Democrat commission: ‘The concept of mutual respect, already endorsed as the
principle governing relationships between the UK and Scottish Governments, should be
incorporated as a constitutional obligation on federal and state governments to respect and
support each other’s role’.
‘Some functions of government should constitute a third category – additional to ‘reserved’ and
‘devolved’ powers – namely ‘partnership powers’, which require the co-operation of both home
rule and federal governments’.
‘In addition to a general constitutional obligation of mutual respect, policy functions in areas of
‘partnership powers’ should impose a legal duty on one government – more normally the federal
government – to consult the other government on a partnership basis’.
‘Each tier of government should have a formal ‘power of initiation’, enabling it to request the
other tier to take some specific action to facilitate policy objectives in an area where the other
government has the policy lead’.
‘The Supreme Court should exercise jurisdiction in relation to dispute resolution, whilst
maintaining that it is not the role of the court to determine substantive political disputes’.
‘Rather than continue a seemingly endless process of revisiting the list of reserved matters,
the future federal, United Kingdom should take seriously the recommendation of the Steel
Commission to establish a new constitutional category for partnership-working’.
Labour commission: ‘Partnership arrangements between Parliaments and Governments whose
responsibilities will inevitably overlap should be established, so that they work together for the
common good, safeguarding civil and political rights, and promoting social and economic rights
such as welfare and full employment. There is a strong case for giving partnership arrangements
a legal existence, in the form of statutory obligations on both administrations to co-operate in
the public interest, or through the creation of a formal Intergovernmental Council or its equivalent
with the duty to hold regular meetings’.

Chapter 4:
Additional proposals

In addition to the proposals detailed above, some parties have also considered the devolution of
further powers in other areas. The same considerations about the implications of any of these
proposals on a wider range of policy areas should also be considered.

4.1  Taxation, funding and borrowing1
Aggregates Levy
Current Situation
The Aggregates Levy is a tax on commercial exploitation of virgin aggregate in the UK, and aims
to internalise the environmental damage associated with the quarrying of rock, sand and gravel
used in construction. The power to raise the Aggregates Levy and to set rates rests with the UK
Parliament. The standard rate is currently set at £2 per tonne, with certain exemptions.
There is currently a legal challenge to the Aggregates Levy. As soon as the court proceedings
in relation to this challenge are completed the UK Government has committed to
consider devolution.
Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Responsibility for the Aggregates Levy should be allocated
to the Scottish Parliament, subject to the outcome of the current European Union dispute,
complementing the existing powers on the environment and recycling’.
Business rates
Current Situation
Business rates (non-domestic rates) in Scotland are devolved. The Scottish Government sets
the rate of the poundage (multiplier) and determines the nature and generosity of reliefs such
as the Small Business Bonus Scheme. The Scottish Government has chosen to mirror recent
changes to the business rates system in England and Wales, such as the two per cent inflation
cap, and bringing the poundage in line with the multipliers in England and Wales, but retains
the ability to pursue its own policy objectives. Northern Ireland has devolved responsibility for
business rates.

	 For background information on taxation, funding and borrowing see Section 3.1.

1

30 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

The Scottish Assessors, who are independent of both local and central government, are legally
responsible for valuing all non-domestic property in Scotland. Local Authorities (LAs) currently
administer and collect business rates in Scotland.
Business rates income is currently the single largest source of revenue under the control of
the Scottish Government. Currently, each LA reports the rates it has collected (or expects to
collect) to the Scottish Government to aggregate into a central pool. From this pool the Scottish
Government reallocates each LA’s ‘distributable amount’ to fund core local government services
according to relative need.
Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Local authorities should set the business rate poundage and
retain the entire revenue from business rates in their areas…A mechanism should be established
by which a community can bring forward a proposal for a burgh council to take over certain
services provided by the principal local authority in the area. This could be funded by a precept
on the council tax and/or business rates raised in the area, a proportion of the revenue support
grant allocated to the existing local authority or by charges for the use of the services taken on
by the burgh council. No new tax would be created’.
Funding and borrowing: additional borrowing powers
Current Situation
Under the Scotland Act 2012, from April 2015 borrowing by Scottish Ministers is allowed up to
£2.2 billion for capital investment and up to £500 million to manage tax volatility (where tax is lower
than forecast). This borrowing is from the National Loans Fund, essentially the UK Government’s
main borrowing and lending account.
The Scottish Government will also be able to borrow the £2.2 billion for capital investment via
commercial loan and/or by issuing its own bonds from April 2015.
Published Proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘The borrowing limit available to the Scottish Government to
cover cyclical variations in tax revenue should be extended to £1 billion to cover shocks to the
proposed revenue base of around £20 billion. This money would continue to be borrowed from
the Treasury, as under the Scotland Act provisions. A fiscal pact should be agreed between
the Scottish Government and UK Government under home rule, or all home rule governments
in a federal United Kingdom, to define limits on borrowing and fiscal action. Tax cuts and extra
borrowing require to be paid for – there is no ‘free ride’. Home rule all round should mean
responsible government all round. The Scottish Government, and other home rule governments
under a federal system, should be permitted to borrow for capital investment under the
prudential regime’.
Funding and borrowing: direct funding from HM Treasury
Current Situation
The core of the Scottish Government’s funding is the ‘block grant’ allocated by the UK
Government. Changes to the Scottish Government’s budget are largely determined by the
Barnett Formula, which provides a population-based share of changes in comparable spending
by UK Government departments.
Under the Scotland Act 2012, Stamp Duty Land Tax and Landfill Tax are being fully devolved
from April 2015 and a Scottish rate of Income Tax is being created from April 2016. As a result,
part of the Scottish Government’s block grant is being replaced by tax revenues – the Scottish

Chapter 4: Additional proposals 31

Government’s budget will therefore be determined by the Barnett-based block grant, less a
block grant adjustment that reflects the tax revenues foregone by the UK Government, plus the
tax revenues generated by the Scottish Government. Further details on the arrangements are
set out in the Scotland Act Implementation Report.2
Published Proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘…a continued block payment from the UK Treasury will continue
to be necessary in a federal system… The remaining funds required to fund the Scottish
Government’s annual programme should come from an equalising payment from the UK
Treasury as recommended by the Steel Commission. The UK should move to an independent,
transparent, needs based formula to serve all parts of the UK well and allow fiscal federalism
to be sustained in the long term, recognising that the Barnett Formula was only ever intended
to be a temporary measure at the end of the 1970s. For transparency reasons, such a needsbased payment system should be based on recommendations by an independent fiscal agency
separate from the UK Treasury’.
Liberal Democrat 2015 pre-manifesto: ‘In Scotland we will…Take forward the recommendations
of the Campbell Commission on fiscal federalism for Scotland, including powers to raise the
majority of the money it spends, not least through control of the taxes on incomes and wealth,
and assigning to Scotland corporation tax receipts from Scottish businesses…The Barnett
Formula is the mechanism used to adjust spending allocations across the UK. In order to ensure
reliable funding at this time, we will retain the Barnett Formula as the basis for future spending
allocations for Scotland and Northern Ireland’.
Labour commission: ‘Labour will give the Scottish Parliament the power to raise around £2
billion more in revenues beyond the recent Scotland Act, so that it raises about 40 per cent of
its present budget from its own resources. The Barnett formula should remain as the funding
mechanism for public services in Scotland. Under our policies, as is the case under the
Scotland Act, the Barnett grant will be reduced to take account of the fact that the Scottish
Parliament will have a revenue stream of its own. As a result the Scottish Parliament will be
funded partly by grant calculated under the Barnett formula and partly by its own tax resources’.
Funding and borrowing: fiscal commissions
Current situation
The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) is an independent body responsible for producing
UK-wide economic and fiscal forecasts which the UK Government adopts as official public
finance forecasts. It has also been asked by the UK Government to forecast revenues from the
taxes that have been devolved through the Scotland Act 2012 (plus Aggregates Levy, devolution
of which is currently subject to legal challenge).
The Scottish Government is in the process of creating the Scottish Fiscal Commission. It is
expected to scrutinise Scottish Government tax revenue forecasts, including Scottish Landfill
Tax and the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (which will replace Stamp Duty Land Tax in
Scotland). Unless otherwise directed, the OBR would continue to make forecasts of UK-wide
taxes, including of devolved tax revenues (including taxes devolved to both Wales and Scotland)
as part of their responsibility for making official fiscal forecasts for the UK.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘…the Finance Committee of the Scottish Parliament is examining
the establishment of a Scottish Fiscal Commission (not to be confused with the Scottish
	 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/second-annual-report-on-scotland-act-2012-implementation

2

32 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

Government’s advisory Fiscal Commission Working Group). The precise remit and operation of
this body is still being decided, although we strongly agree with the Finance Committee’s view
that the Scottish Fiscal Commission must be independent from the Government and should be
invited to provide official macro-economic and fiscal forecasts in Scotland. Consideration should
be given to whether the Scottish Fiscal Commission could take responsibility for publishing the
annual document, Government Expenditure and Revenue Scotland. Scotland’s fiscal balance
sheet should be clearly communicated to the public’.
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘The remaining funds required to fund the Scottish Government’s
annual programme should come from an equalising payment from the UK Treasury as
recommended by the Steel Commission. The UK should move to an independent, transparent,
needs based formula to serve all parts of the UK well and allow fiscal federalism to be sustained
in the long term, recognising that the Barnett Formula was only ever intended to be a temporary
measure at the end of the 1970s. For transparency reasons, such a needs-based payment
system should be based on recommendations by an independent fiscal agency separate from
the UK Treasury’.
Oil and Gas
Current Situation
The UK taxes oil and gas revenues through the ring fence tax regime. The regime consists of
three taxes which are levied on the commercial profits of companies producing oil and gas in
the UK:
	1.	
Ring Fence Corporation Tax (RFCT) at 30 per cent: Levied on profits generated
from production. It is calculated in the same way as mainstream Corporation Tax, but
with the addition of a ‘ring fence’. This prevents taxable profits from oil/gas extraction
being reduced by losses from other activities.
	2.	
Supplementary Charge (SC) at 32 per cent: This is an additional charge on a
company’s profits.
	3.	
Petroleum Revenue Tax (PRT) at 50 per cent: This is a field-based tax charged only
on older fields. It is deductible as an expense in computing profits for RFCT and SC.
As a result, there is a marginal tax rate of 81 per cent on profits from PRT-paying fields and 62
per cent for others.
Oil and gas revenues collected by the UK Government are not earmarked for any specific fund.
Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Oil and gas revenues should continue to be treated on a UKwide basis, preserving the single taxation regime for the UK’s North Sea sector. Consideration
should be given to the establishment of an oil fund, when the deficit situation has been brought
under control, allocating the proceeds to the benefit of Scotland, England, Wales and Northern
Ireland on federal principles’.
Labour commission: ‘We concluded that, for a variety of good reasons, VAT, national insurance
contributions, corporation tax, alcohol, tobacco and fuel duties, climate change levy, insurance
premium tax, vehicle excise duty, inheritance tax, capital gains tax and tax on oil receipts should
remain reserved’.

Chapter 4: Additional proposals 33

Tax Statements
Current situation
From October 2014, HMRC will begin issuing personal tax statements to Income Tax payers.
These will show how an individual’s Income Tax and NICs have been calculated and an
indicative breakdown of how government has spent this money.
Once the Scottish rate of Income Tax is introduced in April 2016, personal tax statements for
Scottish taxpayers will be amended to show the amount of an individual’s Income Tax that has
been paid to the Scottish Government.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘Scottish versions of the Personal Tax Statements should be issued
by HMRC, highlighting taxes under the control of the Scottish Parliament’.

4.2 Welfare
Over 30 million people in the UK – half the total population – receive income from at least
one social security benefit or tax credit. In Scotland 2.8 million people receive payments –
again around half the population. Social security expenditure in the UK represents the largest
single element (around 31 per cent) of all UK Government spending. Spending on benefits,
pensions and tax credits in the UK in 2012-13 was nearly £209 billion. This includes £17.7 billion
in Scotland.3
Under current arrangements State Pension and welfare benefits are set at a single level across
Great Britain (GB). The same rules, including eligibility and payments, apply wherever in GB the
claimants live and with some exceptions, such as housing costs which take account of local
factors, the same rates of payment are made. Local service providers currently deliver the Work
Programme, and the Scottish Government holds responsibility for training and skills. Similarly,
Housing Benefit, soon to become part of Universal Credit, for people who are under Pension
Credit qualifying age, is administered nationally.4 Claims for Attendance Allowance for the whole
of GB are currently dealt with in the North West of England. Wider functions impacting welfare
provision, such as housing and social care, are devolved to the Scottish Government.
When considering welfare devolution proposals, the following issues may be relevant:
•	 the complexity of the social security system and the extent to which it is
interconnected means that decisions in one area can often have significant
repercussions elsewhere in the system. In particular, ensuring that devolved or
reserved power bears the full costs of the impact of its own decisions (including the
cost to its counterpart) is complex and costly to achieve;
•	 the degree to which welfare benefits and services pool risk across economic cycles
and regions of the UK, for example by acting as automatic stabilisers;
•	 the degree to which expenditure on benefits or services is volatile in that it is difficult to
forecast accurately, and forecast variations impose costs elsewhere in the budget;
•	 the degree to which a service or benefit is linked to a local area; and
	 Scotland analysis: work and pensions, HM Government, April 2014
	 Pension credit is means-tested for people over women’s State Pension age. Its principal components
are: a safety net element to alleviate poverty (the Standard Minimum Guarantee); additional amounts for
disability and care needs; support with mortgage interest; and an element (the Savings Credit) rewarding
retirement provision.

3
4

34 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

•	 how a commensurate level of funding should be transferred to Scotland, both in the
short and long term.
Another important consideration is the potential cost implications when building social security
systems. For example, previous analysis by the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP)
estimated that one-off IT costs to develop a new system for the delivery of social security
in the event of an independent Scotland could be between £300 million and £400 million.5
Based on DWP’s experience of developing and introducing large and complex IT systems,
building a new benefit system and supporting infrastructure would also be a major challenge,
requiring expertise, substantial upfront investment and a lengthy lead-in time while the system is
designed, built and tested.
There are several approaches to welfare devolution. For example three approaches could be:
	

1.	devolving a portion of the expenditure relating to claimants in Scotland of a particular
benefit, alongside the power to either vary the rate and rules or operate a separate
benefit with a different rate and eligibility criteria, or alternatively to reallocate that
funding to another area;

	

2.	devolving a proportion of the expenditure on a specific welfare service that relates
to claimants in Scotland, alongside a statutory responsibility to deliver that service in
Scotland, and potentially further powers to either increase or scale back provision of
that service; or

	

3.	powers to ‘top up’ benefits above the level set by the UK Government.

The three parties have set out their proposals for further devolution of powers on the Work
Programme, Housing Benefit and Attendance Allowance to the Scottish Parliament. The
recommendations concerning Housing Benefit predate the national rollout of Universal Credit
(UC). The section below details the specific proposals alongside the current situation in each of
these areas.
Attendance Allowance
Current situation
Attendance Allowance is financial support provided across GB to people with disabilities who
have personal care needs and where those needs arise after the age of 64. It is intended to
provide a contribution towards the extra costs experienced by people with disabilities. The
benefit is integrated within the social security system and provides links through to other
benefits, principally to Carer’s Allowance and to an additional amount in Pension Credit.
Attendance Allowance is administered by DWP and the two rates available are based on a
claimant’s long-term specific day and/or night needs. There are consistent rules across GB
although there is a close association between Attendance Allowance and some social services
personal care provision which is devolved.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘Social care is devolved, as is health. Given that attendance
allowance is closely related to these devolved functions, it should be considered for devolution’.
Labour commission: ‘Given the connection between Attendance Allowance and health and
social care policies, we believe that it should be devolved in full to Scotland. The funding would
be transferred to the Scottish Budget and appropriately updated in future’.
	 Scotland analysis: work and pensions, HM Government, April 2014

5

Chapter 4: Additional proposals 35

Housing Benefit
Current situation
Housing Benefit is administered by LAs on behalf of DWP and provides financial support for
people with their rent. Claimants live in either the private rented sector or the social rented sector
(where accommodation is offered at sub-market rents by Housing Associations and LAs, for
example). Payments take account of household need and local rents.
The Welfare Reform Act 2012 includes powers to abolish Housing Benefit and introduced a new
housing element within UC, which is starting to be rolled out nationally for people who are under
Pension Credit qualifying age.
As a result of providing support for housing within UC:
•	 claimants make one application to one organisation to get their benefit;
•	 claimants do not have multiple benefits being withdrawn at the same time;
•	 awards continue and adjust automatically when claimants move in and out of work;
and
•	 the scope for fraud and error is reduced as benefits will not be based on multiple
information sets held by multiple organisations.
For UC claimants the UK Government has set out a Universal Support framework to build local
delivery partnerships, providing funding to cover incremental costs of supporting the transition to
UC and to incentivise local partners.6
For those above Pension Credit qualifying age, Housing Benefit will continue until at least
2017‑18 to allow for the introduction of the new State Pension in April 2016.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘Housing is devolved, and we can see the case in favour of the
proposition that controlling housing benefit may play a role in the development of housing policy.
A counter-consideration, however, is that under the Welfare Reform Act 2012, housing benefit
is to become one component of the new Universal Credit (‘UC’). It is likely to be administratively
highly complex (and expensive) to disentangle the housing benefit element of UC for Scottish
recipients in order to devolve responsibility for that one component of UC to the Scottish
Parliament. None the less, if it can be done there is a case for devolving housing benefit.’
Labour commission: ‘We take the view that Housing Benefit should be devolved to the Scottish
Parliament. We will use this power to abolish the Bedroom Tax, ensure secure funding for the
provision of social housing and reduce abuse by unscrupulous private landlords.’
Jobcentre Plus and the Work Programme
Current Situation
DWP is responsible for supporting people back to work. It does this, through its network of
Jobcentres, contracted back to work services, the UC delivery model and related provision and
services (including the job bank Universal Jobmatch), by:
•	 having a large high street presence and its Jobcentres providing the face to face
channel for the administration of benefits and dealing with benefit enquiries;

	 Scotland analysis: work and pensions, HM Government, April 2014

6

36 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

•	 ensuring that claimants meet the conditions of receiving benefit, including the labour
market conditions;
•	 encouraging those not currently in work to develop/maintain their labour market
attachment (by making out of work benefits conditional on active job seeking and/or
other work-related activities) to help ensure a quick return to work;
•	 making work incentives as strong as possible whilst maintaining appropriate levels of
income protection for the unemployed;
•	 providing help to improve the employability of individuals who face disadvantages in
the labour market; and
•	 improving labour market information by making job opportunities more visible and the
market easier to navigate.
There are a number of individual programmes which support harder to help claimants into
work through an integrated package of training and work experience. The Work Programme
is the main scheme among these programmes. Service providers in Scotland (Working Links
and Ingenus who deliver services both directly and by sub-contracting to local providers) have
freedom, within the bounds of their contracts with DWP, to decide how best to support Work
Programme participants while meeting minimum standards and contractual requirements for
delivering the service. The focus of the Work Programme is on the needs of the individual and
the support they are provided with will take account of those areas where the person needs
to improve their skills or experience and opportunities in the local labour market. The Work
Programme is based on payment by results, meaning service providers are incentivised to get
people into work.
Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘The Scottish Government should act as the agent for the UK
Government in Scotland on much of the work of JobCentre Plus and the Work Programme’.
Labour commission: ‘Responsibility for delivery of the DWP Work Programme to be devolved
to local authorities to better reflect local labour market conditions, with the Scottish Parliament
playing a partnership role and providing strategic oversight. We are conscious of the need to
ensure a link between the benefits system and income from work and for the need for local
agencies to work in collaboration with local authorities and the third sector’.
Supplement UK Benefits
Current situation
Social security benefits are set at a level that applies across GB. The same rules apply wherever
in GB the claimant lives and with some exceptions, such as housing costs which take account
of local factors, the same rates of payment are made.
There is a degree of flexibility in meeting individual needs through supplementary welfare
provision across GB. For example, Discretionary Housing Payments can be used by LAs to
make additional payments to people for their housing costs and shortfalls in rent which are not
already covered by Housing Benefit. Earlier in 2014, the UK Government agreed to devolve
the cap on how much Scottish LAs can spend through Discretionary Housing Payments to
the Scottish Government. This will give Scottish LAs the flexibility to add more of their own
resources in order to support people who need extra help with their housing costs. Legislation
to enable this is currently before the UK and Scottish Parliaments.

Chapter 4: Additional proposals 37

Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘There is a case for devolving housing benefit and attendance
allowance; additionally there is a case for conferring on the Scottish Parliament the power to
supplement welfare benefits legislated for at UK level’.
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘The strategic planning of welfare services should be considered
for joint working combined with a constitutional duty to tackle poverty through efforts at every
level of government. Social protection, pensions and welfare payments should be allocated to
the UK (and subsequently federal) level’.

4.3 Regulation
Every business is subject to a set of rules and regulations, for example rules on starting up a
business, competition, hiring workers, health and safety and protecting consumers. These rules help
to protect employees and consumers and, if done well, ensure a competitive business framework.7

Regulation of business, employment and finance remain broadly reserved. The three parties
all recognise the importance of maintaining a single UK market for enterprise and jobs, but the
published proposals cover a wide ranging selection of issues from competition to consumers.
Scotland retains a separate legal jurisdiction with separate courts and laws from those in
England and Wales and those in Northern Ireland.
Enhanced powers for the Scottish Government and Parliament have been recommended
around the enforcement, procedure and administration of these regulatory processes. Some
proposals have advocated the creation of separate Scottish models and bodies to deal with
consumer advocacy and advice, and health and safety. The section below details the specific
proposals alongside the current situation in each of these areas.
Competition
Current Situation
In April 2014 a new Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) began operations as the single,
independent competition authority for the UK, replacing the Office of Fair Trading and the
Competition Commission.8 In some areas UK Government Ministers have powers to refer a
market to the CMA for a full investigation.
The UK’s competition regime is independent from Ministers. Much of UK competition law stems
from European law. However, in some specific areas UK Government Ministers do have powers
– in particular in relation to market investigations and any public interest considerations arising
from mergers.
Markets and Mergers
The Secretary of State has a reserve power to refer a market to the CMA for a full market
investigation reference (MIR) in two specific circumstances. First, if the Secretary of State is
not satisfied with a CMA decision not to make a reference. Second, if, having brought to the
attention of the CMA information he considers relevant to its decision to make a reference, he
is not satisfied that the CMA will decide to make a reference within a reasonable period. This
power can also be exercised jointly by the Secretary of State and any other Minister of the
Crown. There is a requirement to consult on any decision to refer a market.
	 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/209891/13-635-scotlandanalysis-business-and-microeconomic-framework.pdf p36
8
	 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/209891/13-635-scotlandanalysis-business-and-microeconomic-framework.pdf p 38
7

38 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

Since December 2010, those powers vested in the Secretary of State insofar as media and
communications policy are concerned relate to the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and
Sport rather than the Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills. The Secretary of
State also has the right to intervene where the Secretary of State believes there is a public
interest consideration which is relevant to a potential MIR. At present the only public interest
consideration specified is national security.
In respect of mergers the Secretary of State has the power to intervene in certain cases
involving a public interest consideration (e.g. national security, media plurality, stability of the
financial system) or the protection of legitimate interests as defined by Article 21(4) of the
EU Merger Regulation.9
The Secretary of State may refer a merger case for more detailed investigation by the CMA
if he believes it may be expected to operate against the public interest. Following such an
investigation and subject to its findings, the Secretary of State is responsible for deciding
whether or not to make an adverse public interest finding, and what, if any, remedies
are appropriate.
Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Competition law should remain a UK responsibility, but the
Scottish Government should be empowered, after similar consultation to that currently required
by the UK minister, to request the Competition and Markets Authority (as it will be in 2014) to
investigate an issue of failing markets or potential monopolies within Scotland’.
Consumers
Current Situation
Consumer policy, advice and advocacy are reserved to the UK Government.
The Citizens Advice Service is responsible for delivering publically funded consumer advocacy
and advice across GB. Citizens Advice Scotland (CAS), receives grant funding from the
Department of Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS)10 and is an entirely separate entity with
its own legal powers, responsibilities, budgets and management structures, working in close
partnership with Citizens Advice (CitA) to deliver a number of shared functions.
Since April 2013 CAS has been responsible for delivering advocacy on general consumer
issues in Scotland. In April 2014, it also took on responsibility for delivering advocacy on the
regulated gas, electricity, postal and water services markets in Scotland. CAS consults the UK
and Scottish Governments on production of its work plan for its advocacy functions and works
closely with both administrations where relevant.
CitA and CAS work in partnership to deliver the Consumer Service which is an online and
telephone advice service for consumers across the UK.
In Scotland a contact centre in Stornoway provides advice on general consumer issues whilst
other CitA contact centres across England and Wales, contracted out to Agilisys, provide
guidance on general, energy and postal issues. All five contact centres operate as a single
UK wide service for consumers who also have access to comprehensive online advice and
information including a section tailored specifically for Scottish consumers.
	 Council Regulation (EC) No.139/2004.
	 BIS to deliver general consumer advocacy and advocacy on gas, electricity and postal issues. CAS’s advocacy
on water issues is funded by the Scottish Government. Most of BIS’s costs are recovered through a levy on
industry though a small amount of funding is provided centrally for advocacy on issues that cut across the
different regulated sectors.

9

10

Chapter 4: Additional proposals 39

Where a Scottish consumer has been disconnected from their energy service, CAS has a duty
to provide specialist advice, a statutory obligation for which they have been allocated funding.11
Other consumer regulators exist in addition to CitA and CAS including Passenger Focus, the
statutory body for rail and bus services.
Published proposals
Labour commission: ‘We see the case for establishing a Scottish model for the delivery of
consumer advocacy and advice, one that would secure and build upon the strengths of the
current providers of consumer advice and consumer advocacy respectively’.
Equality
Current Situation
Enforcement of the Equality Act 2010 is devolved insofar as cases of non-employment in
Scotland are taken to the Sheriff Court. However, employment discrimination cases are
administered by the Employment Tribunal, which is not devolved. Part 9 of the Equality Act 2010
sets out the rules and remedies applicable in discrimination cases.
The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) exercises the same equalities functions
in Scotland as in England and Wales. A separate Scottish Human Rights Commission (SHRC)
exists with broadly similar human rights powers to the EHRC to promote human rights, provide
information and guidance and encourage best practice in relation to human rights. Neither
commission has regulatory powers in respect of human rights, although EHRC has some limited
regulatory equalities functions. The SHRC has restricted powers of inquiry and can monitor
the law, policies and practices and review and recommend changes to any area of the law of
Scotland or any policies or practices of any Scottish public authorities.
The EHRC is required to have a decision making committee known as the Scotland Committee
to advise it about the exercise of EHRC’s functions so far as they affect Scotland. This
Committee must be consulted before the EHRC exercises any function that is likely to affect
people in Scotland. The Scotland Committee has the power to issue advice and information that
pertains to Scotland, and the power to advise the Scottish Government about enactments and
proposed changes to the law affecting only Scotland.
In its executive capacity and as an employer, the Scottish Government has the power to
encourage the fair representation of women (as well as a duty to encourage and promote other
forms of equality opportunity) but cannot currently legislate to achieve greater representation, for
example by requiring that a certain percentage of positions on the boards of public bodies are
filled by women. Scottish employers more generally can also use the positive action provisions
in the Equality Act 2010.
Published proposals
Labour commission: ‘Enforcement of equalities legislation should become a devolved matter.
We also support any other transfer of power, should it be required, to ensure that women fairly
represented on Scotland’s public boards and in other public appointments’.

	 Citizens Advice and CAS have a duty under Section 13 of the Consumers, Estate Agents and Redress Act
2007. This statutory obligation is fulfilled via the Extra Help Unit (EHU) which is delivered by CAS on behalf
of the whole Citizens Advice Service. The cost of delivering the EHU is recovered by BIS through a levy
on industry.

11

40 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

Fixed odds betting terminals
Current Situation
High stakes fixed odds betting terminals in betting offices (and casinos) are subject to provisions
in and under the Gambling Act 2005 in relation to numbers of machines per shop and stake
and prize limits. Bookmakers’ shops are limited to four B2 machines by a combination of section
172(8) of the Gambling Act 2005 and regulation 6(3)(d) of the Categories of Gaming Machine
Regulations 2007.12
The premises themselves are also subject to potential LA licence conditions which can impose
specific constraints on operators. The imposition of a licence condition must be justified by
evidence that the licensing objectives of the Gambling Act 2005 are being jeopardised. This can
be difficult for LAs to impose, as evidence to justify the imposition of a licence condition requires
evidence that the licensing objectives are being jeopardised and may leave them at risk of legal
challenge from bookmakers.
As a part of its reforms to the planning system, the UK Government consulted on creating a
wider ‘retail’ use class and removing the current permitted development rights for betting shops.
This would require planning permission for the change of use to any new betting shop. The
consultation closed on 26 September 2014. The UK Government’s response will be published in
due course and any changes will be implemented in the lifetime of this Parliament.
Published proposals
Labour commission: ‘We will tackle the scourge of exploitative payday loans by giving local
authorities the powers to prevent the proliferation of Payday Loan shops and Fixed Odds Betting
Terminals. In relation to FOBTs, working within the framework of gaming and betting as reserved
matters, we will extend the powers available to local authorities, in conjunction with the UK
Government to address the licensing and technical constraints on Scottish local authorities’.
Health and Safety
Current Situation
The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) is the independent regulator for work-related health,
safety and illness. It acts in the public interest to reduce work-related death and serious injury
across GB’s workplaces. HSE regulates higher risk sectors with LAs regulating lower risk
sectors where they often have other regulatory and licensing responsibilities.
HSE receives grant-in-aid from DWP’s settlement and raises income from charges and fees
for aspects of its regulatory work. Some analogous functions are carried out by bodies other
than the HSE – for example safety matters in the air transport and rail sectors rest with the Civil
Aviation Authority and Office of Rail Regulation respectively.
Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Health and safety legislation, competition laws and employment
law should be allocated to the UK (and then federal) level’.
Labour commission: ‘We believe in the need to establish a Scottish Health & Safety Executive
to set enforcement priorities, goals and objectives in Scotland. This body would still be required
to operate within the reserved health & safety framework and regulations and closely linked with
the UK HSE, but it would be for the body – reporting to the Scottish Government, scrutinised by
12	

Gaming machines fall into categories depending on the maximum stake and prize available: http://www.
gamblingcommission.gov.uk/gambling_sectors/gaming_machines/about_gaming_machines_fruit_m/gaming_
machine_categories.aspx

Chapter 4: Additional proposals 41

the Scottish Parliament and accessing funding provided by that Parliament – to set and achieve
the health & safety objectives of most relevance and importance to Scotland’.
Payday loans
Current Situation
As a part of its reforms to the planning system, the UK Government consulted on creating a
wider ‘retail’ use class and removing the current permitted development rights for betting and
payday loan shops i.e. the intention is that they will in future require planning permission. The
consultation closed on 26 September 2014. The UK Government’s response will be published in
due course and any changes will be implemented in the lifetime of this Parliament.
Published proposals
Labour commission: ‘We will tackle the scourge of exploitative payday loans by giving local
authorities the powers to prevent the proliferation of Payday Loan shops and Fixed Odds Betting
Terminals. In relation to FOBTs, working within the framework of gaming and betting as reserved
matters, we will extend the powers available to local authorities, in conjunction with the UK
Government to address the licensing and technical constraints on Scottish local authorities’.
Employment Tribunals
Current Situation
Employment law is devolved in Northern Ireland but not the rest of the UK. Therefore, the same
employment law applies throughout GB with similar systems for Employment Tribunals (ETs) in
Scotland as in England and Wales. The Employment Appeal Tribunal (EAT) operates under the
same system across Scotland, England and Wales.
Responsibility for the policy framework for Employment Tribunals, including ‘ownership’ of the
Employment Tribunal regulations and rules of procedure, rests with BIS. The rules of procedure
cover the whole of GB.
Responsibility for the procedure rules for the Employment Appeal Tribunal rests with the Ministry
of Justice (MoJ).
Responsibility for policy on charging arrangements for ET fees rests with the MoJ.
Responsibility for the administration of ETs rests with Her Majesty’s Courts & Tribunals Service,
a MoJ executive agency.
There is no devolution, but ETs in Scotland are defined in statute as having a separate territorial
jurisdiction to ETs in England and Wales. There is a President of the ET in Scotland, and a
President for England and Wales. The EAT has a President for the GB wide Tribunal. ETs in
Scotland are administratively distinct from the ETs in England and Wales.
The Scottish Parliament currently has no powers relating to ETs or EATs. The Lord President in
Scotland has a number of judicial responsibilities for the ET judiciary which are established in
statute, alongside the broader judicial powers for reserved tribunals and judiciary set in statute
for the Senior President of Tribunals.
Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Health and safety legislation, competition laws and employment
law should be allocated to the UK (and then federal) level’.
Labour commission: Responsibility for the administration of employment tribunals and the
procedural rules associated with them, including charging arrangements, should be devolved.

42 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

4.4 Constitutional affairs
The Crown Estate
Current Situation
The Crown Estate is the property of the Monarch. It is administered by the Crown Estate
Commissioners under the Crown Estate Act 1961. Under the Crown Estate Act 1961, the
Crown Estate has to operate commercially ‘to maintain and enhance its value and the return
obtained from it’.
The assets that it is largely responsible for are mainly located in England – it is responsible for
the UK Seabed which it manages as a UK asset. Four per cent of all of the Crown Estate’s
assets are in Scotland. Regarding the seabed, the Crown Estate operates under the Crown
Estate Act 1961, under the Energy Act 2004 and the Energy Act 2008 and the Continental Shelf
Act 1964.
Under the Crown Estate Act 1961, accountability is to the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Internal governance involves reporting into a Scottish Management Board, overseeing
Scottish business.
Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Crown Estate assets and harbour, pier, foreshore and similar
rights should be transferred to the control and benefit of local authorities, protected and
sustained as ‘common good’ assets that cannot be disposed of. Local authorities and burgh
council should be entitled to petition the Scottish Parliament for the transfer of underused public
land to their common good fund so that the land can be used for sustainable local uses’.
Labour commission: Local management agreements between local authorities and the
Crown Estate, an example of best practice, should be applied as widely as possible, with
the Crown Estate establishing appropriate mechanisms to facilitate maximum local authority
and community engagement. The Crown Estate should adopt the approach that the default
assumption is that the seabed and foreshore should be managed by local authorities or local
communities, and should further develop leasing arrangements which make this possible. If this
can be made to work, allowing the Crown Estate to take an interest in particular developments,
we will support this. Thus, we propose to use the Crown Estate’s expertise and capital as
necessary, but allowing councils and communities to manage the seabed in other respects, in
order to achieve real devolution to local areas while preserving the benefits of the wider Crown
Estate resource. There should be a Memorandum of Understanding between the Scottish
Government and the Crown Estate, which should be accountable to the Scottish Parliament,
with devolution agreed in respect of their common objectives on the development and
management of the seabed and foreshore, and those local authorities with an interest in this
area should be fully consulted throughout as to its content’.
Entrenchment of the Scottish Parliament
Current Situation
The Scotland Act 1998 established the Scottish Parliament.  The Scotland Act 2012 further
increased the powers of the Scottish Parliament and Scottish Government.  Whilst the UK
Parliament remains sovereign under the current constitutional settlement, during the course
of the original Scotland Bill, Lord Sewel made a commitment that the Government would
‘not normally legislate in devolved areas without the consent of the Scottish Parliament’, a
commitment known as the Sewel Convention and upheld since the Scottish Parliament was
established in 1999.

Chapter 4: Additional proposals 43

Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘The UK Parliament should commit to a declaration that
entrenches home rule and the Scottish Parliament in advance of a full federal settlement’.
Labour commission: ‘Whilst it is inconceivable that the Scottish Parliament would be abolished,
we believe the Scottish Parliament should become permanently entrenched in the constitution
and indissoluble. We also recommend that the “Sewel convention” should be given a
statutory basis’.
Scottish Members of Parliament
Current Situation
Scotland currently elects 59 Members of Parliament (MPs) to the House of Commons of the
UK. The Parliamentary Voting System and Constituencies Act 2011 includes provision to reduce
the number of MPs for the UK from 650 to 600. The Parliamentary boundary review proposals
which followed the passing of the Act consequently included a reduction in the number
of Scottish MPs to 52. These proposals were not implemented following a vote in the UK
Parliament in early 2013.
Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘…the present level of Scottish representation at Westminster
should be retained until a federal structure for the UK has been delivered’.
Scottish Parliament elections and franchise
Current Situation
The system for electing members to the Scottish Parliament and franchise for Scottish Parliament
elections are reserved to the UK Government.
Electoral administration and law is reserved, however the administration of Scottish local
government elections is devolved to Scottish Ministers. In addition, Section 1 of the Scotland Act
2012 allows for the power to transfer responsibility for the administration of Scottish Parliament
elections to Scottish Ministers. This section has still to be commenced but the intention is that
Scottish Ministers will assume responsibility for the administration of the May 2016 Scottish
Parliament elections.
Regulation and funding of political parties is reserved to the UK Government.
Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Control over the Scottish Parliament’s electoral system and
franchise should be allocated to the Scottish Parliament to entrench its equality and authority
within the UK. Electoral administration and law, together with the regulation of political parties
and their funding should remain a matter for the UK Government’.
Labour commission: Responsibility for administration of Scottish Parliamentary elections should
be devolved to the Scottish Parliament.
Scrutiny of legislation by the Scottish Parliament
Current Situation
The Scottish Parliament was established by the Scotland Act 1998, which also sets out its
structure and rules – including aspects such as membership, methods of election and the need
for a Presiding Officer.

44 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

As the Constitution of the UK is generally a reserved matter under the 1998 Act, the Scottish
Parliament itself is unable to make fundamental changes (for example introducing a second
chamber) to its own structure.
The Scotland Act 1998 does however allow that the Scottish Parliament proceedings be
regulated by standing orders for which it has responsibility.
Published proposals
Conservative commission: ‘Convenors of mandatory committees such as Finance and Public
Audit should be elected by committee members from one of the opposition parties. In the
selection of questions for the Parliamentary Oral Question Sessions, the principal opposition
spokespersons should be guaranteed slots in the portfolio questions. General Questions
should be allocated to parties on a basis proportionate to the size of the group. Where for good
reasons, a questioner is unable to lodge a question, discretion should be given to the Presiding
Officer to permit a colleague of the questioner to lodge a question. The Monday noon deadline
for submission of questions to the First Minister on the following Thursday should be deferred to
noon on Tuesday’.

4.5 Other proposals
In addition to the specific proposals made in relation to taxation, borrowing, welfare and
constitutional arrangements, the three parties also made recommendations in a number of
other areas. These propositions cover a range of individual areas from transport to health and
broadcasting. The specific proposals are set out in the section below with details of the current
situation set out in parallel.
Broadcasting
Current Situation
Ofcom is the UK-wide regulator for broadcasting, designated as such by the UK Parliament.
No powers are devolved at administrative or executive level. There is no overlap with existing
responsibilities of the Scottish Parliament. Ofcom is responsible for licensing all commercial UK
broadcasters, including local stations and those based solely in Scotland such as Scottish TV
and Grampian. Ofcom is required by statute to establish separate offices in each of the UK’s
nations and to appoint to its Content Board and Consumer Panel members who will represent
the interests of people living in each of the nations. Ofcom is also required to establish Advisory
Committees for each of the nations.
The licences issued to the Public Service Broadcasters (PSBs i.e. ITV network channels, C4 and
C5) include quotas for regional/devolved nations spend and programming hours and for the ITV
network there are also separate regional programming requirements.13
The BBC operates under a Royal Charter. The Charter provides that one of the BBC’s public
purposes is ‘representing the UK, its nations, regions and communities’. Additionally, the
Framework Agreement entered into by the BBC and DCMS stipulates BBC One and Two must
have versions for Scotland, that dedicated radio stations must be provided for Scotland, and
that quotas must be set for sufficient programming of ‘regional interest’. The BBC’s 2013‑14
Annual Report notes that 10.9 per cent of its network TV production spend was in Scotland,
exceeding its 2016 target of 8.6 per cent. BBC Scotland invests in the Scottish skills base in
	 Channel 3 licences: at least 35 per cent of expenditure to be allocated to productions outside the M25, and
at least 35 per cent of originated network programme hours to be made outside the M25 area. Channel 4
Licences: 3 per cent of its hours and expenditure on programmes for viewing in the UK shall be produced
outside England (rising to 9 per cent in 2020). Channel 5 licences: at least 10 per cent of programmes to be
made outside of the M25.

13

Chapter 4: Additional proposals 45

a number of ways including its apprenticeship scheme (launched April 2011), Drama Training
Initiative, Series Producer Programme run by TRC Media, work experience placements and the
BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra.
MG ALBA receives £11.8 million per annum from the Scottish Government.14 The BBC
provides ALBA with programme funding worth £4 million per annum (including news) as well as
distribution and in-kind support. In August 2014, the UK Government announced that it would
be doubling its funding for ALBA for 2014-16, taking its commitment for the period to £2 million.
Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘Broadcasting should continue to be regulated at a UK level
to reflect a single UK market, whilst encouraging steps to ensure equitable distribution of
broadcasting and media jobs throughout the United Kingdom’.
Labour commission: For the United Kingdom to be an effective union, it is critical that certain
core matters remain reserved to the UK Parliament. Those which are not should be devolved to
the Scottish Parliament. Essential reserved matters include…Broadcasting’.
Foreign affairs (including international development)
Current Situation
Foreign policy is reserved to the UK Government. The power therefore rests with the UK
Government and Parliament. There is no overlap with devolved Scottish responsibilities, except
that Scottish Government ministers and officials may travel internationally or meet international
representatives, in respect of devolved affairs in accordance with the relevant concordat and
Memorandum of Understanding.
Published proposals
Liberal Democrat commission: ‘On EU matters, protocols and practices should be revised to
reflect the need to negotiate and act on an agreed UK position where devolved responsibilities
such as fishing or agriculture are concerned – particularly at the Council of Ministers level.
Scottish ministers should be fully involved, to make sure that an agreed UK position is
established, sustained and represented at meetings’.
Labour commission: ‘The following matters should remain reserved as they are key to the
maintenance of the union…Foreign affairs (including international development) should remain
the responsibility of the UK Government’.
Health
Current Situation
Health and social care are devolved in Scotland but some topics, such as the regulation of many
health professions, the licensing of medicines, the regulation of human fertilisation and embryology,
abortion, genetics and surrogacy are reserved.

	 MG Alba is a body corporate established in statute, under the Broadcasting Act 1990 and subsequent statutes,
and is the operating name of the Gaelic Media Service.  It is regulated by Ofcom, and its remit is to ensure
that high quality television programmes in Gaelic are made available to persons in Scotland.  BBC Alba is the
channel operated in partnership between MG Alba and the BBC, which broadcasts to the whole of the UK on
satellite, cable and digital terrestrial TV, and is also available on BBC iPlayer.

14

46 Summary of the parties’ published proposals on further devolution for Scotland

Published proposals
Labour commission: ‘Abortion, xenotransplantation, embryology, surrogacy arrangements,
human genetics, matters relating to the regulation and control of medicines (for both humans
and animals), medicinal products, poisons and biological substances, should remain reserved’.
Skills
Current Situation
Skills policy is a devolved matter for the Scottish Parliament.
Skills Development Scotland is the national agency for skills delivery in Scotland, created by the
Scottish Government in 2008.
Published proposals
Labour commission: ‘Skills Development Scotland’s responsibilities to be devolved to local
authorities in order that planning and provision of skills and training better matches local
job markets’.
Transport
Current Situation
Scottish Ministers have substantial devolved powers in relation to the railways in Scotland,
including acting as the franchising authority in relation to franchising in Scotland. However,
the Scotland Act 1998 does not devolve to the Scottish Parliament the power to amend the
Railways Act 1993 in relation to the provision and regulation of railway services.
Section 25 of the Railways Act 1993 expressly prohibits public sector operators from being
franchisees.
With regard to passenger rail services that both start and end in Scotland – i.e. virtually all the
current Scotrail franchise including the Caledonian Sleeper service – Scottish Ministers specify,
procure, fund, manage and enforce the franchise agreement. This allows the Scottish Ministers
to determine matters such as the level of service and fares policy.
Changing the current position to permit a public sector franchisee in Scotland would
require either:
•	 an amendment to section 25 of the Railways Act 1993, which could only be made by
the UK Parliament; or
•	 a change to the current devolution settlement to allow the Scottish Parliament the
necessary legislative competence to amend section 25 of the Railways Act 1993 in
relation to Scotland only. This could be achieved through either an amendment to the
Scotland Act 1998 (to further transfer legislative competence), which can only be made
by the UK Parliament, or via a ‘section 30 Order in Council’ which can only be passed
with both the agreement of the UK Parliament and the Scottish Parliament.
Published proposals
Labour commission: ‘We favour devolution of railway powers that could facilitate consideration
of a “not for profit” option in terms of the Scotrail franchise. This will widen the powers of the
Scottish Parliament over the rail system’.

