What’s at stake? Everything.
150,000 Welsh jobs – more than 1 in 10 - depend on EU trade.
EU funding supports16,000 Welsh farmers – up to 80% of farming income.
Each person in Wales gets £40 more from the EU than they put in.
Only Plaid Cymru wants the very best for Wales. Vote for the Party of Wales to:
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t

$VUCVTJOFTTSBUFTGPSNPSFUIBODPNQBOJFT
$SFBUFOFXKPCTCZHJWJOHQVCMJDDPOUSBDUTUPMPDBMöSNT
1SPWJEFBKPCPSUSBJOJOHHVBSBOUFFUPVOEFSZFBSPMET
4MBTIZPVSHBTBOEFMFDUSJDJUZCJMMTXJUIBOPUGPSQSPöU8FMTIFOFSHZ
company
6QHSBEFQVCMJDUSBOTQPSUBOESPBEMJOLTBTXFMMBTCSPBECBOEBOENPCJMF
coverage
3FGPSNUIF&6BOEDVUXBTUFGVMFYQFOEJUVSF
&OTVSF8FMTIIBTUIFTBNFTUBUVTBTPUIFS&6MBOHVBHFT
5SBJOBOESFDSVJUFYUSBEPDUPSTUPSFEVDFXBJUJOHUJNFT
'JHIUUPQSPUFDUKPCTFDVSJUZBOEXPSLFSTSJHIUT
&OTVSFSFBMBDUJPOPODMJNBUFDIBOHFBOETVQQPSUGPSPVSDPNNVOJUJFT
affected by its impact.

Making Europe work for Wales
The forthcoming European election is Wales’s referendum.
It is our opportunity as a nation to come together and reject the
dangerous politics of division that has characterised the European
debate in recent years; a politics of cynicism that seeks to pit
communities and people against each other.
In the year that marks the centenary of the First World War,
of one hundred years ago.
That the EU is often too cumbersome and slow to respond to the
Plaid Cymru knows and recognises concerns about economic
inequality that can result in large movements of people from
one part of the EU to another, and its impact on wages and
opportunities for local people. An issue like this requires
pan-European co-operation to redress economic imbalance
continent-wide.

Leanne Wood AM
Leader of the Party of Wales
“Only the Party

We’ve got to be in it to change it.

of Wales can and
family - £5 billion worth of trade is invaluable to Welsh businesses
and more than 150,000 jobs are directly linked to our participation
in the EU.

will put Wales
first at all levels of
government, each
and every day.”

government, each and every day.
As the threat of a UK withdrawal from the European Union
increases, it is more important than ever for Wales’s voice to be
heard loud and clear in Brussels.
Plaid Cymru will continue to put concerns such employee rights,
climate change, tax avoidance and job creation at the top of the
European political agenda. We will take every opportunity to
further the Welsh national interest.
At these elections, we’re asking all those who care about Wales’

Leanne Wood AM

&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP]
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

Contents

A strong team to put Wales First ...........................................................................................................................

5

Economy & Jobs ............................................................................................................................................................

6

Health ................................................................................................................................................................................

9

Education .........................................................................................................................................................................

10

Food, Agriculture & Rural Affairs ...........................................................................................................................

12

Energy & Climate Change ..........................................................................................................................................

14

Information Technology .............................................................................................................................................

16

Transport ..........................................................................................................................................................................

17

Crime & Justice ...............................................................................................................................................................

18

Brand Wales .....................................................................................................................................................................

19

Tourism ..............................................................................................................................................................................

19

Housing ..............................................................................................................................................................................

20

International Policy .......................................................................................................................................................

21

Equalities ...........................................................................................................................................................................

22

The future of Wales in the EU ...................................................................................................................................

25

]&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP

tPapur Ymgynghori Plaid Cymru

A strong team to put Wales First
Plaid Cymru is the Party of Wales. We put the
We want Wales to be a full and equal member of
the European Union, playing a vital role in
partnership with fellow nations in improving
people’s lives in Europe.
To do that means making the European Union
including reform of the European Union to make it
more democratic and answerable to the people of
Wales and Europe.

dent Wales. We want to create sustainable jobs,
a better healthcare service, a better educated
workforce and a high standard of living.
Plaid Cymru does.
The people of Wales are our priority.
We are answerable only to them.

European election.

both from the decades of peaceful trade between
member countries and policies to support
economic development and combat climate
change.
Wales gets European Union funding to improve
our economy. But it isn’t good enough to rely on
this funding because we are considered poor. Plaid
Cymru wants Wales to stand on its own two feet in
Europe, exporting products and skills across the
European Union and the world.

Jill Evans MEP

Party of Wales Candidates Marc Jones | Jill Evans | Steven Cornelius | Ioan Bellin
&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP]
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

Economy & Jobs
A SUSTAINABLE ECONOMY AND CREATING
WELL-PAID WORK ARE PLAID CYMRU’S
PRIORITIES.
The economy has been stagnant for several years
this recovery. We want higher quality employment,
better wages and barriers to women in work
removed.
As more than 150,000 Welsh jobs depend upon
trade with European Union countries, with a trade
value of more than £5 billion per year, European
Union membership is crucial to our economic
recovery.

Plaid Cymru wants an
increase in the number
and value of contracts
from Welsh public
bodies that go to firms
within Wales.
Plaid Cymru wants to increase this trade through
improving Welsh exports and is currently
consulting on an Overseas Trade Initiative to make
our businesses more competitive on a European
high-skilled, well-paid jobs to the Welsh economy.
This builds on Plaid Cymru’s already published
economic proposals.
In Plaid Cymru’s ‘Plan C - a plan to move the Welsh
economy forward’, we launched a series of ideas to
improve the economy through better local
procurement and upskilling our workforce.

Plaid Cymru has worked to improve European
procurement legislation and public sector practice
contracts. This includes small and medium
businesses who support the supply chain by using
more Welsh companies and employees who spend
their money in their local high street.
In France and Germany around 98% of public
sector contracts go to their own companies. If
we can increase the value of Welsh public sector
will create almost 50,000 jobs for people living in
Wales. A Plaid Cymru government will introduce a
Public Procurement Bill to ensure best practice so
money.
A Plaid Cymru government will provide small
businesses in Wales, and take 70,000 out of paying
business rates altogether. Businesses with a
rateable value of below £10,000 will pay no rates,
with rebates for businesses with a rateable value
of up to £15,000.
Plaid Cymru wants Wales to be a European and
world leader in green growth through ensuring
that we have the skills and research and
development to reduce our energy use, generate
renewable energy and reduce waste and
packaging.

Plaid Cymru wants an increase in the number and
value of contracts from Welsh public bodies that
per year by Welsh public bodies on procurement,
half of it is leaking away. Each percentage increase
means 2,000 extra jobs.

]&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP
tPapur Ymgynghori Plaid Cymru

providing jobs in Wales and earning income from
other countries.

During the economic downturn Plaid Cymru
argued for investment in Welsh infrastructure,
including our hospitals, schools, broadband and
transport networks. We still believe that these
continued cuts mean that few projects have
started and been completed.
Plaid Cymru is concerned that these cuts mean
purpose, meaning that Wales will not be prepared
for the challenges of a growing economy.
Improving infrastructure means space for the
town centres or online and with state of the art
facilities in our schools and hospitals.
If the economy is to reach its potential in creating
jobs and value then it must value and utilise the
skills of everyone.

Plaid Cymru would introduce
a Parental Leave scheme to
include both parents and
remove the stigma of taking
time off work to care for
new-born children.
which was blocked by the UK government
Women should play a greater role in economic
decision making in Wales. Plaid Cymru supports
an EU-wide quota for female directors in major
companies.
With youth unemployment above 40% in some
parts of the country, it is crucial that we do not
have a lost generation who don’t know what it is
like to go to work.

Underemployment is a major issue in our
economy, with more than one in ten people in
work either over-skilled for their current job or
looking to increase their hours. This is a major
drag on Wales’s overall economic performance.
contracts to be banned and pushed amendments
on this for agricultural and social-care workers.
they should be able to know in advance how much

As part of the Budget deal in 2012, Plaid Cymru
ensured 5,000 new apprenticeship
opportunities. These have been very popular.

contracts.
their communities, as well as supporting small
and medium businesses with training new
members of staff.
Increasing the aims and ambitions of young
people is vital if we are to improve the Welsh
vocational opportunities to allow them to reach
their potential.
Currently many skilled and experienced women
are prevented from entering the employment
market because of barriers such as adequate and
affordable childcare or caring duties.

Plaid Cymru will adopt the European Youth
Guarantee so that under-25s who have not been in
education, employment or training for four
months are given real opportunities to improve

&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP]
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

The West Wales and the Valleys region has once
funding as a result of its economic performance
compared with the EU as a whole. The UK has the
most unequal economic performance in the EU
EU but more than half of areas within the UK
performing below the EU average.
The UK does not have a regional development
policy and successive UK governments have tried
to scrap the EU regional policy too, undermining
the Welsh national interest. They have failed so far,
but, in future, this may not always be the case.
Westminster’s failure can be seen in that Wales
still suffers from an unfair funding formula. The
independent Holtham Commission proved that
Wales is under-funded by up to £400m per year

returns for the Welsh economy in terms of
infrastructure, training and jobs.
Plaid Cymru will also ensure that advice is more
businesses and employers to access European
funding, and play their role in the upskilling of the
Welsh workforce.
In government, we ensured that projects gained
access to European Investment Bank funding for
jobs.

on our health and education. Plaid Cymru would
scrap the Barnett Formula and replace it with a
formula based on the needs of the people of Wales.

However, Wales still receives less per head than it
should from European Investment Bank funding in
the UK.

This will be the third time that West Wales and the
and while it is welcomed as part of the EU strategy
to improve the economies of poorer performing
regions, Plaid Cymru does not believe that it is
acceptable for parts of Wales to continue to lag so
far behind. The funding must be used to transform
our economy.
A better skilled workforce will be better able to
develop indigenous business and attract foreign
direct investment in Wales.
In government, Plaid Cymru ensured a strategy for
European funding that concentrated funding into
fewer projects with a larger impact.
Plaid Cymru believes that future European funding
should be invested into skills and infrastructure
that will provide long-term change in the economy
as a result of the economic stimulus.
That is why Plaid Cymru is consulting upon an
arms-length body, involving private business, to
ensure that this investment has the greatest

]&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP
tPapur Ymgynghori Plaid Cymru

Plaid Cymru will push for greater use of this
funding stream for projects that will create jobs
and future work opportunities.
As part of its efforts to promote employee
ownership of companies and co-operatives, the
European Union is considering setting up
specialist support centres in each member-state.
Plaid Cymru has called for the the UK’s centre
to be located in Wales. As the birthplace of the
founder of the co-operatives movement, Robert
Owen, and with our history of co-operatives, we
are best placed to make this a success. It would be

experience to help employees and businesses to
grow and create jobs in our local communities.
In Wales, Plaid Cymru wants taxation and
funding issues addressed so that the minimum
wage becomes a genuine living wage for families
and households.

Health
THE WELSH NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE IS
A VITAL PART OF EVERYBODY’S LIVES.
and reach its potential.
Currently the ratio of doctors to population in
Wales is one of the lowest in the European Union.
A Plaid Cymru government would put a
programme in place to train and recruit an
additional 1,000 doctors in Wales to reach the UK
close to people’s homes as possible.
Healthcare is international and during the next
European Parliament we will prioritise the
development of recognised workforce standards
throughout the European Union.
practice are rigorous and recognised to ensure the
free movement of health professionals throughout
the EU, whilst ensuring that patients and
This will include minimum language standards
appropriate for each country, and ensuring all
health systems have appropriate professional
development built into career pathways.

Plaid Cymru included telemedicine provision in
excellent work on eHealth being done in our
universities.
Plaid Cymru supports the ‘’All Trials’ campaign for
the publication of all clinical trials. Current
estimates suggest half of all clinical trials are never
published. This means trials are sometimes
duplicated unnecessarily.

A Plaid Cymru government
would put a programme in
place to train and recruit an
additional 1,000 doctors in
Wales.
The publication of all available trial data will mean
EU regulations on the licensing of medicines are
more transparent. Clinicians will be able to make
decisions on treatment based on all the available
treatments they receive.

We will also ensure that there are European wide
systems for identifying doctors struck off for
malpractice so that patients throughout Europe
are protected from poor practice.

Plaid Cymru will work to ensure that Wales
receives a fair share of research funding.
This will enhance the attractiveness of our health
service to doctors, as well as ensuring patients can
have access to the latest treatments.

Plaid Cymru is involved in the drafting of EU
legislation on eHealth and telemedicine that will
improve the quality of patient care and save
patients time and cost.

&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP]
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

Education
PLAID CYMRU BELIEVES THAT ALL
CHILDREN SHOULD ACHIEVE THEIR FULL
POTENTIAL.
Plaid Cymru would ensure that all children have
basic literacy and numeracy skills with a proper
support system to identify and assist those
struggling at any time.
attainment tests showed that our school children
are not reaching the levels that they should.

As part of the Welsh Government, Plaid Cymru
supported the adoption of the Foundation Phase
for children under seven, a system based on that
in Finland, with a play-based curriculum to
promote learning and discovery. However we are
concerned that it has not been effectively
implemented and that staff to pupil ratios are not
at an appropriate level to provide the stimulus and
educational support that children need.
Plaid Cymru wants a greater focus on ensuring the
on-going development of core skills in schools.
Plaid Cymru will continue to learn from
educational initiatives around Europe to
constantly improve Welsh education standards.
Bilingualism and multilingualism is the norm in
Europe. Evidence points to improved educational
attainment by bilingual and multilingual children,
and Plaid Cymru wants all Welsh children to share
in those improved outcomes. Developing language
skills is good for the individual and the wider
economy and we will push for greater uptake and
achievement in languages.

We are under-performing compared to our
performing of the four nations in the UK, and
Wales one of the poorest performing countries in
the European Union.
As education is wholly the responsibility of the
Welsh Government, there can be no excuses for
this poor performance that affects the future life
chances of children, preventing them from
reaching their potential.

A Plaid Cymru government
will set a target to improve
our PISA rankings and seek to
break the cycle of poverty and
low educational achievement.
To begin to break that link between deprivation
and poor attainment, we secured extra money
budget, more than doubling it from £450 per year
to £918 per year.

]&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP
tPapur Ymgynghori Plaid Cymru

Those opportunities manifest themselves in the
programmes for international co-operation,
including Comenius for schools, Erasmus for
education and training and Grundtvig for adult
Erasmus+ programme.
These programmes create opportunities for
educational links between individuals, regions
and countries, creating diverse cultural
experiences and business opportunities.
Plaid Cymru will continue to promote these
programmes to internationalise young people and
give them a broader world outlook.

Migration
PLAID CYMRU BELIEVES THAT WALES
SHOULD PLAY A GREATER ROLE IN
DEVELOPING MIGRATION POLICY.
Free movement of people within the EU, allowing
people to live and work in another country is a
fundamental principle of European Union
membership.
likely to be in work than comparable groups in the
host society and less likely to be claiming welfare
contribution to the economy.
Wales has an acute skills shortage. The abolition of
the post-study work visa means that educated and
skilled graduates from Welsh universities must
This is a missed opportunity, especially
considering that, during the two years when a
graduate is looking for employment, they have no
recourse to public funds.

Plaid Cymru believes that a
post-study work visa for
Wales should be reintroduced.
A skills shortage list should
also be published by the
Welsh Government.

Plaid Cymru believes that Wales should play a
greater role in the development of migration
policy as a whole, engaging at all levels with the
consultations on behalf of the UK Government.
Plaid Cymru supports a migration system for the
UK, similar to that in Quebec, where the
Government receives a percentage of state
migrants.
Integration services for refugees and other
migrants must be the responsibility of the Welsh
Government. The devolution of health,
housing and education, as well as the unique
political institutions and culture in Wales, means
that an understanding of civic society in Wales is
necessary.

should be actively recruiting across the European
Union. With a potential workforce of more than
550 million people, an economically developed
country like Wales should be an attractive place
The Welsh Government should therefore target
migrants with particular skills, for example,
lecturing staff at our universities or doctors in our
health service, as well as people willing to work
with us to improve the Welsh economy. Wales
needs a Welsh migration policy that meets Welsh
needs.

&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP]
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

Food, Agriculture & Rural Affairs
PLAID CYMRU RECOGNISES THE
IMPORTANCE OF FOOD PRODUCTION TO
OUR ECONOMY. WALES DEPENDS ON ITS
FARMERS AS FOOD PRODUCERS AND
MANAGERS OF THE COUNTRYSIDE.
We welcomed the continuation of the Common
Agricultural Policy (CAP) which helps keep over
80% of Welsh farms in business with direct
payments.
Attempts by the previous and current UK
Governments to abolish these payments show how
the Welsh national interest is very different from
the UK interest. Of the four parties representing
Wales in Europe, only Plaid Cymru voted to protect
the CAP budget. Plaid Cymru is clearly on the side
of Welsh farmers.
Plaid Cymru worked with colleagues in other
nations to ensure that the agricultural reforms did
not penalise Welsh farmers who had already
adopted environmental programmes. We secured
to the new payment regime. While the results of
CAP reform are mixed, we avoided the disastrous
consequences that would have occurred if the UK
government succeeded in its aim of further
changes.

Plaid Cymru voted against cuts
in the EU budget because it
meant cuts to Welsh agriculture
funding. The farming
industry is crucial to our
economy and needs a
sustainable long term future.
We also opposed the Welsh Government’s decision
to transfer the maximum 15% from Pillar 1 to
Pillar 2 of CAP, an attack on Welsh farming at a
time when the industry has already seen a 44%
net drop in farm incomes.
Plaid Cymru wants to introduce a moorlandprovide additional support to our upland farmers.

]&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP
tPapur Ymgynghori Plaid Cymru

We have successfully worked to assist young
farmers and other new entrants into farming
through schemes such as the Young Entrants’
Plaid Cymru has worked closely with the farming
community on issues such as the dairy package,
Development Plan and fallen stock. We will
continue to promote and protect our agricultural
industry.
The localisation of the food chain is essential to cut
down on food miles and un-necessary
transportation. That is why we support local farms
and local processing facilities, abattoirs, and food
markets so that people can buy food from local
suppliers and sources.
The horsemeat scandal highlighted the importance
of international regulation in protecting
consumers on an international level. Co-operation
led to agreements, an action plan and timeline to
deal with ‘food fraud’.
Plaid Cymru believes that the link between fresh
produce and food on the plate must be restored
and families should be supported by local
authorities to grow their own food in allotments
and gardens.
But buying good food depends on the consumer
knowing exactly what it contains. We have worked
to constantly improve food labelling and give
consumers real information and choice. It is
unacceptable to label food as healthy when it
when people buy Welsh meat they want to be sure
that it was born, reared and slaughtered in Wales.

That is why we will be pushing for a major
extension of "country of origin" labelling, as well
as looking to support Welsh abattoirs following
the closure of Gaerwen.
We would also like to see comprehensive food
miles and water footprint labelling so that the
environmental impact of our imported food
becomes clear.

labelled so that customers know what they are
purchasing.

As it becomes ever easier to travel and transport
goods around the world, the threat that invasive
alien species pose to our environment and to our
economy becomes ever larger. It is estimated that
market costs incurred by invasive alien species
amount to £125 million per year in Wales.

Plaid Cymru opposed the growing of biofuels on
land that should be used for food production.

Plaid Cymru will work to ensure that the EU's
strategy on invasive alien species includes

Plaid Cymru promotes Welsh produce at every
opportunity and is keen to see more producers
gaining European status to recognise and protect
their products through the Protected Designation
of Origin (PDO) and Protected Geographical
Indication (PGI).

threats.

Plaid Cymru is working to ensure that the new
regulations on seeds exempt home gardeners and
small businesses.

Animal welfare is a crucial issue in the European
Union and Plaid Cymru is calling for a European
Commissioner to take particular responsibility
for animal welfare issues. This would send out a
powerful message that the European Union takes
this seriously.

We will continue to
promote and protect
our agricultural industry.

Plaid Cymru also wants to see the speedy adoption
of a comprehensive new animal welfare law
proposed by the European Union to ensure that
the high standards met in Wales are met on a
Europe-wide basis.
Plaid Cymru believes that sustainability in the
in Wales.
We support the Blue Growth strategy to
strengthen the maritime and marine economy,
linking with the land-based economy to produce
added value through local markets and innovative
products.

&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP]
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

Energy & Climate Change
ENERGY IS A MAJOR CONCERN FOR ALL
HOUSEHOLDS IN WALES.
Climate change cannot be tackled on a countryby-country basis. That is why Wales must work
with the European Union and other international
institutions to reach agreement and commit to
action on reducing man made climate change and
promoting decarbonisation.
Plaid Cymru wants all powers over energy
generation and regulation in Wales to be
transferred to the Welsh Government. Currently
Wales only has powers to give planning

In the short term, Plaid Cymru is calling for a
reduction of VAT on energy bills, saving families on
average seventy pounds per year.
We need a sustainable energy supply in the years
ahead.

Proposals made by the Commission on Devolution
in Wales for the transfer of limited powers do not
go far enough in our opinion.

It is a scandal that our
households have the highest
average energy bills.
We pay more for heating and
power than either England or
Scotland, despite Wales being
an energy rich nation that
produces more electricity
than it consumes.
Energy bills have continued to rise dramatically in
particularly those of pensioner households who

energy company based on the same model as ‘Glas
Cymru’ in the water industry.

energy use.

]&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP
tPapur Ymgynghori Plaid Cymru

If Wales produces more of its own renewable
energy then we will be able to lessen our reliance
upon other forms of energy and electricity and
reduce our bills.
That is why we want greater community
investment and ownership of renewable energy
production. Communities themselves must see the
production in their own areas.
We also want a Welsh national energy grid to
secure energy transmission in Wales.
Plaid Cymru shares the widespread concerns
about the use of hydraulic fracturing to force shale
gas from the ground.
The environmental impacts of this process are
unknown, but could include the contamination
of the water table. It also means continuing our
dependency on fossil fuels. Exploiting this carbon
intensive form of energy will also undermine our
obligations to deliver on our national and
international carbon reduction targets to help
tackle climate change.
Plaid Cymru voted in favour of the European
Commission's proposal to extend the
Environmental Impact Assessment Directive to
include fracking. This decision was later
overturned. We also called for pylon projects to
be included in the directive.

The Welsh Government has so far not succeeded in
making Wales a greener land in terms of our
must be placed centre-stage in government
activities.
We will investigate European and international
sources of funding to develop the substantial
amount of renewable energy available from the
become an international model.
Plaid Cymru wants greater investment in research
and development into renewable energy so that
we can become world leaders and export our
expertise, rather than buy in knowledge from
other countries.

Plaid Cymru will seek to use
European Investment Bank
funding for green and
renewables projects that will
mitigate against climate change
as well as providing an
economic stimulus to the
Welsh economy.
The European Union has legislated for increasing
recycling and reducing waste.

electrical equipment through parliament.
This means working with higher education and
private business to ensure that the research and
development funding and skills are available in
research and applied work already underway in
other European nations in Europe. Plaid Cymru
ensure we have the skills required for a change
towards renewable and environmentally friendly
energy usage.
Plaid Cymru would establish a Green Energy
Centre alongside the College to co-ordinate the
work done by businesses and universities and to
maximise funding opportunities.

Plaid Cymru will continue to work to maintain our
precious biodiversity. This includes reversing the
decline in the number of bees. Bees pollinate
one-third of the food we eat and contribute
millions to the economy. However, Welsh

Plaid Cymru successfully campaigned in the
European Parliament for the prohibition of
neonicotinoid pesticides - one of the factors
done to tackle habitat loss and disease as we
strive to stem their decline.

Plaid Cymru will continue to scrutinise sustainable
development in Wales and beyond, ensuring that
the European Union leads the world in
environmental legislation as we enter a period in
which the impact of climate change will become
increasingly widely felt.
In Wales this has manifested itself in substantial
The industrialised nations throughout the
European Union must adopt ambitious climate
to show others that these are achievable and to
help prevent dangerous deterioration.

&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP]
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

Information Technology
PLAID CYMRU WANTS TO SEE WALES FIRST:
AT THE FOREFRONT OF EUROPEAN
TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS.
When we were in government, Plaid Cymru
ensured that developing superfast broadband across
Wales, not just in urban areas, was a central aim.
Proposals for high speed internet through improved
infrastructure were a key element of our Economic
Renewal Plan, as were plans to eliminate ‘not spots’
across the country.

We want a better
connected Wales online
so that everybody can
take advantage of
the opportunities.
We want a better connected Wales online so that
everybody can take advantage of the opportunities,
whether that is social interaction with family and
long-lost friends or getting better informed about
the world. This is especially important in rural areas
and for small businesses to compete internationally.
It is unfair on consumers, and on those living in
rural areas in particular, that communications
regulators allow mobile phone companies to
provide a slower service than in more populous
areas. This lack of connectivity is bad for business.
The European Union, on the other hand, has been
crucial in ensuring a fair deal for mobile phone
owners by slashing the exorbitant charges made for
cross-border telephone calls and data.
The European Parliament recently voted to end
roaming charges for phone calls and download data
so that it will be the same price to make calls or
download abroad as at home.
Plaid Cymru recognises the dangers of internet
fraud and want to see action taken to prevent
electronic fraud and the taking and distribution of
illegal images.
Plaid Cymru wants initiatives to deter individuals
from engaging in anti-social behaviour online such
as cyber bullying or cyber stalking.

]&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP
tPapur Ymgynghori Plaid Cymru

This means cross-border co-operation to ensure
common standards and thresholds for action to
prevent this type of behaviour.
But we also value the right to privacy and will push
for a Europe wide agreement to prevent government
clearly intelligence-led.
Plaid Cymru has a strong record of supporting civic
freedoms on-line and protecting individuals whose
freedoms are being infringed by others.
against the ACTA (Anti-Counterfeiting Trade
Agreement) that threatened civil liberties, and we
will continue to work to ensure that new EU data
protection laws do not strip users of their privacy.
We believe that legal framework and crime
enforcement responsibilities must remain up-todate to deal with changing technology.

Transport
A JOINED UP AND INTEGRATED TRANSPORT
SYSTEM IS ESSENTIAL FOR WALES. THAT IS
WHY PLAID CYMRU IS CURRENTLY
CONSULTING ON A NEW NATIONAL
TRANSPORT PLAN.

diesel trains will be surplus. We will investigate
how these trains can be used elsewhere to create
additional services, for example, on services west

Plaid Cymru will set up a national not-for-dividend

and north Wales.

reinvested into improved railway services rather
than paid to shareholders. This would ensure a
service better tailored to customer needs and
those of the economy. The full devolution of rail
powers is essential for this.

We also want a feasibility study conducted on
re-opening a Carmarthen to Aberystwyth railway
to link major towns in the west of Wales.
Bridges to be the property of the Welsh
Government once they are returned to public
ownership. This would allow us to cut tolls to a fair
price whilst continuing to re-invest that funding
into infrastructure. This will include reducing
popular routes in all parts of Wales.
We supported the purchase of Cardiff Airport
and investment into improvements. Plaid Cymru
believes an international airport is a crucial part
of our transport and economic infrastructure.

Plaid Cymru believes that this money should be
used to upgrade Welsh transport services.
We will continue to campaign for the routes from
to be designated as part of the main EU corridor
of the Trans-European Network linking Ireland
with the European mainland. We will work
tirelessly to ensure that Wales gets maximum

Europe and the world to Wales, is important for
our export markets and tourism. We will take
advantage of all support that can be provided by
the European Union to assist in this.
As a country bordering the sea on three sides,
Plaid Cymru believes that Wales needs a ports
strategy for both passenger and freight transport.

should be fast-tracked to be carried out as part of
the current railway construction period, rather
than delayed until the 2020s.
link communities across the valleys and coastal
areas of south-east Wales. We value public
transport and the economic opportunities that
better public transport connections can bring.
communities that receive European convergence
funding we will continue to investigate
opportunities for additional funding to create jobs
and opportunities in these areas.

&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP]
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

Crime & Justice
PLAID CYMRU BELIEVES THAT POWERS
OVER THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
SHOULD LIE IN WALES, AS THEY DO IN
SCOTLAND AND NORTHERN
IRELAND.
This includes policing, prisons, the court service
and probation. We should co-operate with criminal
justice authorities elsewhere on an international
basis to prevent international crimes, particularly

Plaid Cymru wants to
help communities affected
by anti-social behaviour,
including drug-taking
or abuse.

allocated to investigations and the prosecution and
Plaid Cymru believes that governments across
Europe should increase steps to prevent this crime

We want to see strong action taken to cut crime.
We want to see offenders successfully
rehabilitated back into society through a restorative justice method.

However, while supporting international
co-operation, Plaid Cymru is concerned about the
misuse of the European Arrest Warrant. Those
arrested using these powers must have the right
to appropriate legal support, and suggestions that
the warrant is being mis-used must be
investigated.

Young offenders are better off out of prison in their
community than learning about a life of crime
behind bars. Victims can’t be ignored as they too
often feel they have been.

We support the European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR) that underpins our justice system.
Plaid Cymru would challenge any attempt by the
UK government to repeal the Human Rights Act, in

Plaid Cymru would introduce a Victims’ Bill of
Rights which would put victims at the heart of the
judicial process, and ensure that reported crimes,
particularly those such as abuse crimes, are taken
seriously by the authorities.

allows each consecutive government at a UK level
rights should be so easily repealed.

where necessary and a cross-UK commitment to
preventing terrorism. We want to see that same

Plaid Cymru is particularly concerned by

One of the many successes of devolution in Wales
has been the creation of a Children’s
Commissioner for Wales who puts children’s rights
centre-stage. Plaid Cymru wants to see this successful formula replicated on a broader scale by
the creation of a European Children’s Champion.

the European Union has recognised this as a
priority. Reports suggest that 80% of victims of

The complexity of family relationships and
international legal obligations can make cross-

who are overwhelmingly used for sexual

The welfare of the child can sometimes be
neglected. A Children's Champion would ensure
that, in these circumstances and in international
agreements, treaties and policies, children’s rights
and wellbeing are given top priority.

crime and ensure justice for victims of crime.

for labour.
Plaid Cymru wants to see increased resources

]&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP
tPapur Ymgynghori Plaid Cymru

Brand Wales

Tourism

IT IS IMPORTANT THAT WALES, AS A
NATION, IS RECOGNISED ACROSS THE
WORLD.

TOURISM IS A CRUCIAL INDUSTRY
THROUGHOUT WALES.

That is crucial for attracting foreign investment
and increasing our tourism footfall.

Our heritage and countryside, including our
national parks attract tourists from across Europe
and beyond. We have promoted Wales at every
opportunity in the European Parliament with
exhibitions and seminars.

Producing quality Welsh goods for export will
improve knowledge of Wales. This includes
manufacturing, but also food and drink produce.
Plaid Cymru will continue to support strategic
trade missions across the world to foster
awareness of Wales in new territories, and take
advantage of new opportunities that this
provides to create jobs.

European cultural tourism network involving the
smaller nations in the EU.

A brand with consistently positive associations
is vital in generating these opportunities and
a Plaid Cymru government will ensure that
there are no weak links in the chain, with
exemplary standards being set and met in
all outward-facing industries.

Republic of Ireland.

This includes the up-skilling of workers so that
they are able to meet international employment
challenges alongside the best in the world.

quality accommodation to meet tourists’ needs.

A Plaid Cymru government would support the
hosting of major world events, including the
Commonwealth Games, international football
championships and the World Exposition.

Plaid Cymru will launch a Celebrate Wales year to
stimulate tourism across the country, similar to

Our unique bilingual culture sets us apart from
other countries of the United Kingdom.
Wales’s culinary expertise should also be promoted,

Recognising the importance of the service industry
in tourism, a Plaid Cymru government will press for
improved standards.
Ensuring improved transport opportunities to
Wales is a vital part of the tourist experience.

Ensuring consistency of brand and penetration
of other markets will mean working with the
best Welsh public relations companies to ensure
that the world knows about the best of Wales.

&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP]
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

Culture & Media

Housing

PLAID CYMRU RECOGNISES THAT WALES IS A PLAID CYMRU WANTS TO SEE CONTINUED
MODERN BILINGUAL EUROPEAN NATION, AND IMPROVEMENTS IN THE QUALITY OF
HOUSING THROUGHOUT WALES.
OUR MEDIA MUST CONTINUALLY
REFLECT THAT REALITY.
Plaid Cymru has opposed the unfair bedroom tax
from the beginning. We have called for the Welsh
because so much of our media is commissioned and Government to adopt a ‘no evictions’ policy and
broadcast or published in a different country and
ster.
does not recognise or understand Wales.
Plaid Cymru has called for the devolution of
the Commission on Devolution in Wales.
Plaid Cymru supports the arts in both of our

Following a period in which private sector rents in
Wales have been increasing faster than any other
country in the UK, Plaid Cymru will introduce
stricter rent controls to ensure that families and
young people are getting value for money.

created an English national theatre for Wales when
in government.
Wales has a huge amount of priceless national
monuments, and we believe that every child ought
to have the opportunity, free of charge, to visit one
school years.

Plaid Cymru will insist on written tenancy
agreements which contain set minimum standards
and ensure the rights of tenants are protected.
This will prevent poor standard housing being
let and set up a register of rogue landlords. Plaid
Cymru will regulate all letting agents and clamp
down on disproportionate charges and fees.

access mortgages, something which will prevent
an overheating of the rental market in Wales, and
We will create a single national library service under ensure that young people are not priced out of the
housing market.
remains committed to the process of making
digital more Welsh print and visual material as well Plaid Cymru welcomes the return of the Housing
Revenue Account funding to local authorities in
as continuing the screen and sound archive.
Wales to spend on their social housing stock.
Plaid Cymru successfully lobbied for the right of
European Union governments to cut VAT on
household improvements to 5%, but the UK
Recognising that Wales has fewer bank holidays
than almost any other nation in the European Union, Government has so far failed to implement this
measure. In Wales, which has an older and more
traditional housing stock, cutting improvement
costs would make housing refurbishment cheaper
and cut families’ fuel bills through insulation.

]&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP
tPapur Ymgynghori Plaid Cymru

International Policy & Security
PLAID CYMRU BELIEVES THAT WALES HAS A
MAJOR ROLE TO PLAY IN WORLD AFFAIRS.
A hundred years have passed since the beginning
of the Great War, when Europe became a
As we commemorate the centenary of World War
One this year, it is worth remembering that the
European Union has ensured six decades of peace
between its members and continued to expand
eastwards to cover most of the European
continent.
Plaid Cymru has supported a stronger role for the
European Union’s High Representative for Foreign
Union can play a greater role internationally in
keeping missions, working alongside the United
Nations.
Plaid Cymru has called for an EU civilian peace

Plaid Cymru supports the setting of strong postDevelopment Goals.
These must be ambitious and achievable on a
global scale. The post-2015 goals must include
national targets to reduce
inequality both at home and abroad, recognition of
the impacts of climate change upon poverty and be
respected by international organisations,
including those outside the development sector,
because without agreement and support, the aims
of the goals will not be achieved.
Plaid Cymru continues to support legislation to
underpin the 0.7% Gross National Product that
should be provided in international aid and that
aid effectiveness should support countries to
develop their own path from poverty. This must be
stringently monitored by independent
organisations.

trust and prevent violence.

Reducing debt repayments from third world
countries, or cancelling them altogether, would
substantially assist developing countries to tackle

We have proposed a Wales Peace Institute to
research all aspects of peace in society and to
advise and inform policy makers on the
consequences of their decisions.

Cymru supports cancellation of debt and the
prevention of lending that damages the economies
of developing nations leading to a continued spiral
of debt.

Recent events in the middle-east, particularly in

Plaid Cymru continues to oppose international tax
havens that fail to provide transparency and skew
the international tax system against legitimate
taxation regimes that recognise the role of tax in
providing and improving core public services such
as healthcare and education.

negotiation.

preventing military action.
We oppose all nuclear weapons as immoral,
ineffective and expensive. Trident nuclear
submarines should be scrapped and the money
spent on health, education and international aid.
Plaid Cymru wholly rejects any suggestion that
Wales could be a location for nuclear weapons, as
Plaid Cymru does not support a European army,
but we believe that the EU nations should
co-operate together on an international level.

Plaid Cymru supports a nation by nation and
transactions, with the money raised being used to
reduce poverty, both at home and in developing
countries.
In the European Parliament, Plaid Cymru has
continued to oppose illegal occupation and
oppression. We support legal international action
through the International Criminal Court against
governments of any country who commit human
rights abuses.

&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP]
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

Equalities
PLAID CYMRU BELIEVES IN EQUALITY AS
A FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE.
Plaid Cymru supports the rights of those who have
‘protected characteristics’ and will do whatever
possible to protect them from all forms of
discrimination.
These protected characteristics include age,
disability, gender reassignment, race, sex, sexual
orientation and religion or belief.

possible are convicted.
Plaid Cymru continues to support the excellent
work undertaken by the Older People’s
Commissioner in Wales as an advocate for older
people, particularly in shining a light upon issues
affecting those less able to represent themselves.
We recognise the need to tackle scams to take
advantage of older people.
The success of the Older People’s Commissioner
and the Children’s Commissioner in Wales has
led to calls for a Disabled Person’s Commissioner
for Wales to operate in a similar manner to tackle
all forms of discrimination against those with a
disability, particularly indirect forms of discrimination that have a negative impact upon people’s
lives, and to improve accessibility.
Plaid Cymru has consistently condemned the
Government that negatively affect disabled people,
adding to stress and worry in people’s lives. Plaid

Plaid Cymru has supported EU legislation that
helps achieve equality in all areas of life.
In Wales, Plaid Cymru has led campaigns to end
homophobic bullying in school and to raise
young people’s issues.
At a European level, Plaid Cymru will push for
action to ensure that EU member states have
effective legislation that prevents hate crime
according to sexual orientation and gender.

Plaid Cymru believes that we should learn lessons
from France to increase conviction rate

there has yet to be a single conviction in the UK. By
contrast, France has the largest conviction rate in
Europe. There should be a Europe-wide campaign

]&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP
tPapur Ymgynghori Plaid Cymru

that strengthen links between disability and poverty, as well as quality of life issues and ill-health
more generally, including the negative impact of
the ‘bedroom tax’.
The freedom for religious worship and belief, or
to hold no religious belief, is important to Plaid
Cymru.
Plaid Cymru will do everything within our powers,
including education, law and policing, to prevent
‘hate crime’ of any sort, ensuring that people are
not abused because of their race, religion, sexual
orientation, age, disability or gender.

Welsh - an official language of the EU
THE WELSH LANGUAGE BELONGS TO ALL
THE PEOPLE OF WALES, WHEREVER THEY
LIVE, WHICHEVER LANGUAGE THEY SPEAK.
When we were in government, Plaid Cymru
rights for individuals to receive services through
Commissioner to ensure that the interests of
Welsh language speakers are proactively
safeguarded and promoted.
The status of the Welsh language is important.
In our National Assembly for Wales, Plaid Cymru
political party.

language of the European Union.

To work in the European institutions you need two
young people are bilingual, they are at a
disadvantage, and must learn another language to
qualify for employment
would give us equality and provide international
job opportunities for Welsh speakers, and give

We are determined to
revitalise Welsh as a
community language and
we will increase the
opportunities for everyone
in Wales, and our young
people in particular, to use
the language.
2011, Plaid Cymru undertook a year-long
conversation with the Welsh public to develop

to the work of Plaid Cymru. But we want to go
further. We want equality for our languages with

Responses showed how the Welsh language links
to economic improvement and that, without a
strong economy and with limited local
employment opportunities, people are forced to

not a symbolic gesture.
In Wales, there are nearly 600,000 Welsh
speakers, many of whom are young people, but
their language skills are not currently recognised.

Plaid Cymru wants to increase the use of Welsh
in the workplace in the public, private and third
sectors and will use procurement contracts and
apprenticeships to promote use of Welsh.

&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP]
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

Wales as an Independent Member State
PLAID CYMRU BELIEVES THAT WALES
SHOULD BE A MEMBER STATE OF THE
EUROPEAN UNION.
This would make us a full voting member with the
right of veto where the European Treaties allow so
that the Welsh Government would have a voice at
the top table.
We would have full access to and participation in
the European Union as a member state to allow us
to work for the Welsh national interest rather than
be represented by the United Kingdom government which does not act in our best interests.

where there is no agreement, this should be
reported.
The UK has one European Commissioner who is
appointed by the UK Government.
Plaid Cymru has proposed a ‘rotating’
commissioner from the United Kingdom selected,
in turn, by the different governments within the
would get to select our own commissioner when
our turn comes around.

If all four UK nations were to become independent
members of the European Union then all would
European Parliament and their own European
Commissioners. Wales would elect 9 European
Parliament members rather than the 4 that we
representation.
Under the current system, Wales is represented
European Parliament, by two members of Ecosoc,
by four members of the Committee of the Regions
(2 full members, 2 alternate members).

Welsh ministers may be
allowed to attend meetings
as part of the United Kingdom
delegation, but are speaking
on behalf of the UK
Government, not Wales.
Plaid Cymru believes that there should be
automatic Welsh representation in European
Council decisions when they have an impact upon
Observer status with speaking rights.
We also believe that the casting of the UK vote
should require agreement by the relevant
ministers from all four administrations and that,

]&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP
tPapur Ymgynghori Plaid Cymru

Under the present circumstances, Plaid Cymru
believes that the National Assembly for Wales,
along with the other devolved administrations,
should participate in the selection of the UK’s
European Commissioner and have the power of
veto for unsuitable candidates and the power to
nominate candidates for the process.
The National Assembly for Wales should review
Wales’s overseas representation, learning from
best practice. The focus should be on providing a
service which promotes the Welsh national
interest, providing political representation from
the Welsh Government and National Assembly and
a trade mission to promote Wales.

The future for Wales in the EU
PLAID CYMRU STRONGLY SUPPORTS THE
CONCEPT OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, BUT
NOT THE FRAMEWORK OF THE CURRENT
EU.
We welcomed the increase in powers of the
European Parliament, but want further
democratisation.
We support the principle of subsidiarity. This
means that decisions should be taken as close
as possible to the people who will be affected by
them. In some cases this will be at local
authority and community council level in Wales, or
in the National Assembly for Wales or
Westminster and, where decisions are best taken
collectively, at a European Union level and other
international organisations.
Wales’s future within the EU is of crucial
importance. European Union membership is in the
best interests of Wales, maintaining trade with the
rest of the continent, securing more than 150,000
the EU, with £5 billion worth of trade taking place
between Wales and European Union countries.
international investment into Wales at risk as we
would no longer have automatic access to the
single market of more than 550 million people.
This would impact strongly upon indigenous

Referendum results for Wales should be declared
separately so the will of the people is clear.
Plaid Cymru believes that the review of the
balance of competences between the European
Union and UK government must also include the
Welsh Government and should be part of the
Commission on Devolution in Wales now that their
second report has been published.
Plaid Cymru also believes that, given the
including the failure of European banks to deal
European economies, sterling remains the best
currency to serve Welsh interests.
national interest, as part of the European single
via the Common Agricultural Policy, European
programmes such as Erasmus.
But reform is long overdue. Plaid Cymru has long
campaigned for ending the parliament’s monthly
costs more than £100m per year to operate and
generates 19,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide
annually. Parliament itself has voted to end the
national governments can make the decision.
We will continue to demand this is done.

Any referendum on EU
membership should
follow and honest and
factual public debate on
what is in the
Welsh national interest.
Prior to any referendum, the UK and Welsh
Governments must publish reports on the
impact upon Wales of leaving the European Union,
including how European Union funding will be
replaced.

Despite common perceptions, European
cent of the total European Union budget. The
biggest items of expenditure are the Common
Agricultural Policy and the Regional and
This shows why Wales needs its own seat at the
European table so that we can represent
ourselves in discussions, not be part of a UK
position which is often very different from the
needs of Wales.

&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP]
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

Plaid Cymru has opposed the austerity measures
which have caused such suffering to many people
across the EU. We called instead for investment to
create sustainable jobs.

Plaid Cymru has long worked to strengthen the
laws on consulting workers and to ensure equality
We supported the cap on bankers’ bonuses, and,

A general cut to the EU budget is not in Wales’s
interests. Plaid Cymru was the only party that
voted in the Welsh national interest and against a
budget cut in the recent discussions, recognising

for the economic crisis, Plaid Cymru wants
Europe-wide agreement on a full separation of
retail and investment banks, in order to reduce the
risk to customers and institutions.

Wales.
While trying to protect the EU budget, there are
the multi-million Euro ‘European House of History’
museum project. The EU is a remarkable
achievement and should be celebrated, but when
peoples’ wages and pensions are being cut, we
cannot afford to build museums.

Plaid Cymru continues to express concern about
the Transatlantic Trade Investment Package that
threaten core European Union rules, including the
protection of public services, intellectual
indications, health or environmental standards.
Plaid Cymru will continue to oppose forms of
the expense of employees and communities, and

Plaid Cymru supports a compulsory register of
lobbyists in the EU institutions. It is voluntary at
present but with over 5,000 lobbyists in Brussels,
more needs to be done to ensure transparency and
protect the interests of constituents.
Plaid Cymru wants to see a more social Europe,
true to its aim of full employment.
In industry, employee involvement at all levels
is crucial in ensuring effective decision making.
Decisions must be made with workers’ rights and
relationship.

]&VSPQFBO&MFDUJPO.BOJGFTUP
tPapur Ymgynghori Plaid Cymru

agreements that protect investors but not people.
Plaid Cymru will change the role of Wales House
in Brussels to promote trade and investment in
Wales and allow them to lobby on Wales’s behalf.
Plaid Cymru supports proposals for an adequate
minimum income in each European Union
member state as everybody has the right to an
adequate standard of living.
No-one should be forced into poverty or to leave
their home in search of work because of the lack of
available opportunities in their homeland.

Promoted & Published by Rhuanedd Richards
On behalf of Plaid Cymru - The Party of Wales
Glanfa’r Iwerydd
post@plaidcymru.org
02920 472272
Papur Ymgynghori 1MBJE$ZNSVt

Plaid Cymru

