Manifesto for the European Parliament elections 2014

real
change

Jean Lambert and Keith Taylor are our existing Green
MEPs. Jean was first elected in 1999 and Keith took
the seat previously held by Caroline Lucas in 2010,
when she was elected MP for Brighton Pavilion.

Contents

2

3	 a europe for the common good

22	 Decent pensions for all – now and in the future

4	An economy for the common good

22	 Expanding the bounds of human knowledge

4	 Fiscal policy: fairer taxes, fighting austerity, building a
green economy

23	 Higher and Further Education: The Bologna process,
Erasmus and learning across Europe

5	 Making finance the servant of the real economy

24	Housing

6	 Fighting for debt justice

25	Fighting discrimination, opposing oppression

6	 Whose economy? Defending public services, extending
democracy

25	Migration

7	 Decent jobs for all

27	 Rights for black and minority ethnic people

8	 Standing up for workers’ rights

28	 Gender equality

9	 Consumer rights: ensuring we can trust what we buy

28	 Equality for disabled people

9	 Fair trade, building a better economy

29	 Opposing ageism

11	Currency

29	 Children’s rights

11	 Using procurement for good

30	 Religious freedom

11	 Measuring what matters

30	 Stateless nations and minority languages

12	Preserving the planet

31	 our Europe: governance for the common good.

12	 Climate change

31	 Institutions of the EU

13	 A low carbon energy revolution

32	Transparency

14	 Low carbon manufacturing

32	 New EU members

14	 Low carbon cities and towns

32	 Pan European policing

15	Transport
15	 Better use of natural resources

32	 Freedom online: Defending the internet, protecting your
privacy

15	 Food, farming and the natural world

33	 Human rights and civil liberties

17	 Protecting our seas and oceans

34	 peace, justice, and our place in the world

17	 Flood prevention: from the watershed to the river
mouth

34	 Foreign and defence policy
34	 Our nearest neighbours

18	 Allowing our eco-systems to flourish

34	 Other international blocks

19	 Animal protection

35	 Israel, Palestine and the quartet

21	 defending public services

35	 Helping build a just, sustainable world

21	 Health and social care

36	JOIN THE GREEN PARTY

26	 LGBTQI rights

A Europe for the common good

T

oo often, the story we are told about our
future is one of pain and decline: austerity,
falling wages and climate crisis; unemployment, rising housing costs and depleting
pension pots. But it doesn’t have to be this way. It
is well within our power to build for ourselves and
our children a better world than the one we find
ourselves in now. We need to act together, and choose
a fundamental change of direction.
Our soaring inequality is not an inevitability. It is
the result of political decisions. Our dependence on
fossil fuels is not a necessity. There are alternatives.
Austerity is not the only option, and for those who
want a fairer future it’s not an option at all.
The wealthiest have been allowed to dodge vast
quantities of tax. Bailouts handed billions to the
banks, but did nothing to stop them from gambling
away the wealth of our nation. They are re-inflating
old bubbles and flogging our assets to those who
caused the crisis – handing our Royal Mail to hedge
funds, our NHS to those who profiteer from illness and
our countryside to those who will frack it.
The economic crisis, the environmental crisis and the
democratic crisis we face are intertwined. We can’t
save the planet when the world is run by those who
profit from destroying it. We can’t solve poverty when
the decisions are made by the wealthy.

The Green Party has always called for a different path.
If we invest, we can provide good, stable jobs for
everyone. If we stand up to vested interests, we can
avoid the worst of the climate crisis. If we ensure that
the powerful pay their fair share, like the rest of us,

then we can have the best schools, hospitals and care
homes in human history.
If we take back power from big businesses and their
lobbyists, we can build an economy that works for the
common good. If we deepen our democracy, we can
build strong communities where we look out for each
other and where everyone is treated as equals.
There are affordable homes to be built, a generation
to educate, a zero-carbon revolution to be delivered.
In short, there is work to be done. There are people
desperate to do it. Yet our bankers are allowed to
gamble our money on toxic debts and toxic fuels
rather than investing our future, and our leaders are
rich in corporate donations but poor in ideas.
In order to meet these great challenges, we need to
co-operate with our neighbours.
Across Europe, social movements have grown from
the ashes of broken lives and broken economies.
Students are on the march, workers are organising and
villages are stopping frackers in their tracks. In city
squares and in public meetings, in workplaces and on
the streets, new ideas are stirring. And the EU is the
forum through which the peoples of Europe can work
together to build a better future, together.
And we’ll be there. We’ll be there to stand up to
hired voices of the rich and work for an EU that puts
people and our shared future before the profits of the
wealthiest. We shall be there to ensure the EU hears
the voices of the many, not the few, and that it plays
its part in building a fairer future for its people. With
your vote, this is the Europe the Greens will work to
build: a Europe for the common good.

3

AN ECONOMY FOR THE COMMON GOOD
Fiscal policy: fairer taxes, fighting austerity
and building a green economy.
The Green Party support a fairer tax system, in which the
wealthiest contribute more and no one can dodge their
responsibility. We oppose austerity: the poorest should not
have to pay for a crisis they didn’t create. The solution to a
collapse caused by banks is not to cut funding for librarians
and care workers. It is to invest in building a fairer, low
carbon economy which doesn’t rely on the financial sector
or on scraping the bottom of the fossil fuel barrel.
Green MEPs will argue for investment in our future
economy, not the cuts, deregulation and privatisation which
are destroying communities across Europe.
Austerity makes the most vulnerable pay for a crisis they
did not cause. It shatters lives and frays the fabric which
binds our communities. It has increased unemployment,
extended the economic crisis, and done nothing to solve any
of the true challenges faced by our society: inequality and
joblessness; the housing crisis and the environmental crisis.
Greens stand with those across Europe who have argued
for a different approach: fairer taxes and action to ensure
no one dodges them; investing in jobs in the industries of
the future and recognising the vital contribution made by
public services; debt audits and, sometimes, cancellations;
using quantitative easing to deliver investment in
the infrastructure we need, not encourage ever more
speculation.
The EU should support green and social investment to fund
a just transition to a fairer, more sustainable economy based
on people doing work with which we truly enrich each
other’s lives and which delivers the zero-carbon revolution
needed to prevent catastrophic climate change.
Green MEPs will work within the EU to:
•	Take action on tax evasion and avoidance. EU governments lose a trillion Euros a year to tax dodging 1. Greens
will argue for the EU and its member states to take
action by pursuing stricter international agreements and

changes in national and EU rules. This will include:
•	End double taxation agreements with tax havens, so that
companies registered in havens also have to pay tax in the
EU.
•	Pass, and work towards full enforcement of, amendments
to the Parent Subsidiary Directive including a general
anti-abuse provision and denying tax benefits to
companies making use of hybrid loan instruments.
	

- pushing forward international negotiations to close tax
loopholes.

	

- requiring country by country reporting of turnover,
profit and tax paid.

	

- pursuing through the courts those who break tax laws
in any member state;

	

- making white collar crime, including tax evasion, a
higher priority for Europol (see under ‘common European
policing’).

•	Phase out the European Value Added Tax. Currently, the
EU requires member states to collect VAT, in part as a
contribution to the budget of the EU. This is a regressive
tax, because poorer people spend a higher portion of their
income (rather than saving it). Green MEPs will argue for
mandatory VAT to be scrapped, for governments to be
allowed to determine how they raise this share of their
contribution to EU budgets.
•	End public fossil fuel subsidies as agreed in international
commitments, such as the lack of fuel duty on aeroplanes
•	Increase funding for EU regional development funds
and asking the UK government to hand over control of
spending to the level of government most local to the
region being funded – in practice, the local councils
in West Wales and Cornwall. The Conservative led UK
government has been instrumental in delivering a 5% cut
in EU funding to West Wales, Cornwall and other impoverished regions across Europe. Greens will work to protect
this funding.

1 http://uk.reuters.com/article/2013/04/12/us-eu-tax-vanrompuy-idUSBRE93B0KC20130412

FOOD BANK BRITAIN
As part of his work exposing the effects of austerity, Keith
produced a report on the surge in demand for food banks
in his constituency. The report, called Food Bank Britain,
revealed a 60% increase in the number of people using food
banks in 2013 compared to 2012.
Green MEPs Keith Taylor and Jean Lambert were
instrumental in persuading the European Commission to
include poverty-reduction targets in its EU2020 Strategy.
4

VULNERABILITY REPORT
Highlighting the experience of the most vulnerable In the
European Parliament, Jean worked closely with civil society
NGOs on a report to reflect the real experience of some of
Europe’s most vulnerable people. The report was passed
with overwhelming support from the Parliament and sent
a clear message that austerity measures must be assessed
for their social impact and not only a narrow economic
effect. All must be able to access healthcare, care services
and basic living support.

Making finance the servant of the real
economy
The banking system which failed in 2007/8 has not been
fixed. It must be radically changed. Finance must be made
the servant of the real economy, not the inflator of ever
more bubbles. We believe that states should recover for
themselves the power of money creation, and not allow it to
remain in the hands of private banks, whose motivation is
private profit rather than the common good. We also need
to build in Britain and across Europe a new manufacturing
sector, investing in the tools of tomorrow’s economy.
To do this will require a banking sector which invests in long
term productivity, not the short term profit of a derivative
gamble. Greens will argue for measures which cut the role
of our financial districts and replace these with measures
which will encourage investment in local manufacturing
and the real economy. The EU, who have been so involved in
the bailing out of many of these banks, has a key role to play
and the European Central Bank, which controls the Euro, will
be vital.
Green MEPs will:
Use our public and central banks to build a better economy:
•	Call on the European Central Bank and Bank of England
to finance jobs building the infrastructure needed to
deliver the transition to a low-carbon economy through a
programme of Green Quantitative Easing‚.

FINANCIAL TRANSACTION TAX
Greens in the European Parliament have been leading
proponents of a financial transaction tax (FTT) aiming
to tackle the problems associated with speculative and
high frequency trading while also raising revenue for
public services across the continent. Greens succeeded
in improving a Commission proposal in several respects.
They made sure that banks would be unable to avoid
the tax by moving to other financial centres. If a bank is
legally domiciled in the EU it will have to pay regardless
of where its trades are transacted. Greens also
introduced an amendment on the use of FTT revenue for
own resources in order to provide a revenue stream for
European Parliament initiatives. They backed the idea
of some Member States implementing the FTT even if
others do not support it.
Capping bankers’ bonuses
Greens succeeded in bringing about a Europe-wide cap
on bankers. Keith and Jean voted for cash bonuses to be
sharply reduced. As part of the push for greater equality,
Jean has been working with the High Pay Commission
to see what the next steps might be.Despite fierce
opposition from corporate lobbyists, Greens have been
instrumental in bringing about powerful regulation
that reduces the risks in banking and brings increased
transparency to the finance industry.

•	Align the lending of the European Investment Bank with
the social and environmental aims of the EU.
•	Support measures to stop the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development financing fossil fuel
projects and other environmentally and socially damaging
projects and instead contribute to the financing of a
zero-carbon revolution.
Build a banking system which works for the common good
•	Work to stop banks from gambling away on the money
markets the wealth created by us all. Green MEPs will
argue for a Financial Transaction Tax that includes all of
the countries of the EU (not just the 11 that have signed
up), and eventually joins with other global financial
markets; and which includes a ‘Spahn mechanism’
whereby transaction tax rates can be immediately
increased in times of speculative attack. This will curb
damaging high frequency trading, divert money towards
the real economy, and reduce the risk that the markets
attack already struggling economies2. Only around 8% of
lending by banks in 2010 went to productive investment3.
Unless we change this, we can’t mend our economy.
•	Continue to fight to curb bankers’ bonuses.
•	Call, as a first step, for the adoption of EU financial
reforms, breaking down banks until they are small enough
that their failure doesn’t risk the whole economy, and

raising capital requirements to make the system safer.
•	Support moves towards a separation of retail and investment banking.
•	Work for a diverse banking system made up of regional,
co-operative and municipal banks; green investment
banks and credit unions.
•	Demand greater transparency in bank lending decisions.
•	Work for a tightening of laws banning irresponsible
banking. All financial products should be screened. Those
with no social purpose should be banned.
•	Work for more EU level support for policing of bank
regulations to ensure that, when rules are broken, criminal
bankers are arrested (see ‘policing’).
•	Work for more international co-operation in the regulation of international banking, including the establishment of an international forum to discuss new financial
products.
•	Continue to build on the regulatory steps being discussed
in the market in financial instruments directive in order to
secure stricter regulation of derivatives markets to clamp
down on speculation in basics such as food.

2 http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/economics/2012/08/robin-hood-tax-will-stop-machines-wiping-out-market
3 http://www.neweconomics.org/issues/entry/monetary-policy

5

•	Terminate trade deals pushing the liberalisation of
financial markets. Banks should operate on local rather
than global scales.
•	Work towards better regulation of pension funds.
Currently the money invested in pension funds is too
volatile a capital flow, destabilising the global economy
and risking people’s retirement savings.

•	The cancellation of illegitimate and unsustainable debts
owed by EU countries. To finally resolve the European debt
crisis, a conference of creditors and debtors should agree
reductions in debt to a sustainable level, ensuring that the
costs of this restructure fall primarily on the banks and
financial institutions which lent recklessly.

•	Require pension funds to take into account the universal
investor principle in all of their investments, whereby they
consider the broader long term social, environmental and
economic impacts of their investments because, as long
term investors across the whole economy, they will be hit
by these too.

•	The EU to work globally to define illegitimate debt and
establish a framework for cancelling illegitimate and
unsustainable debt, including supporting the creation of
a fair and transparent global debt workout mechanism.
Such a debt workout mechanism should be independent,
and so not run by a lending institution such as the IMF.

Fighting for debt justice
Borrowing to invest can be the path to a better future. But
too often, debt becomes a chain to imprison people and
their governments and has been used to impose austerity
on communities across Europe and the world. Much of
the debt owed by the world’s poorest countries is owed to
companies and countries in the EU. Too often, across the
world, the money was borrowed by oppressive regimes and
used for the benefit of dictators, not of the people who live
in destitution as they attempt to pay it back. There is not
enough clarity in what is owed to whom, why from when,
and therefore whether repayment is just.

•	Stronger environmental, social and human rights
guidelines for lending and credit guarantees from export
credit agencies and EU institutions, to be in line with the
UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
principles on responsible lending. EU governments should
not be subsidising, for example, the sale of arms to
oppressive regimes.

regulating credit ratings agencies
	 Greens in Brussels have been pushing for a major
re-shaping of the way that credit ratings agencies
work. Greens insist that rating agencies should not be
allowed to hold shares in companies they rate, since this
represents a conflict of interest. As another measure to
combat conflicts of interest, Greens have pushed for the
finance firms having their debt rated to be restricted in
their choice of agency by a rotation mechanism.

Likewise, the debts owed by some European governments,
such as the Greek government, are not entirely clear or
accountable. In the case of what have become known as
the PIIGS countries, those who bare no responsibility for
accruing debt are often being forced, in part by the EU, into
destitution in ill-fated attempts to pay it off. This is unjust,
entrenches poverty and yet again shifts wealth from the
productive economy to the financial districts. It takes two
to make a debt, yet the current system is based on the
punishment of the borrower and the bailing out of the
lender.

Whose economy? Defending public
services, extending democracy, challenging
big business

Greens will continue to work for debt justice in Europe and
globally, where peoples are only expected to pay off those
debts that they accrued themselves through fair process.
We will continue to stand with movements in Greece, Spain
and across Europe fighting against unjust debt settlements.

Public services and natural monopolies ought to remain in
public hands. Consumer co-operatives, worker co-operatives,
community or local council control and other forms of
democratic ownership should be supported to expand
throughout our economy.

Green MEPs will argue for:

Privatisation and part privatisation have contributed to
Europe’s economic difficulties in recent years, yet they
continue apace as those who benefit most from them gain
more wealth and so more power. In the UK, most of this
privatisation has been led by the our domestic governments,
including Labour, Liberal Democrats and Conservatives.

•	An audit of sovereign debts owed to EU institutions such
as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and European Investment Bank, and cancellation of
any debts found to be illegitimate.
•	A debt standstill mechanism, in which the EU would
protect struggling indebted nations from their creditors
for a period so that they can have breathing space in
which to work out their debts in a more orderly fashion.
This mechanism should be immediately applied to Greece,
and other nations ought to be able to apply for such
4 http://weownit.org.uk/blog/80-want-public-ownership-option

6

protection.

We should go in the opposite direction. We should bring
infrastructure such as water supplies, the national grid and
railways back into public ownership. Between 70% and
80%4 of the public want this to happen. Yet Labour, Tories
and Lib Dems are too in hoc to those who profit from these

Andrew Cooper, European election candidate for Yorkshire and the Humber, defending the NHS.

privatisations to stand with the people of the country.
We also support measures to significantly expand other
forms of democratic ownership, including establishing
co-operative and municipal banks, handing powers to local
authorities to municipalise services, and the introduction
of a workers’ right to buy their company. A handful of vast
corporations have too much power over our economy and
our lives. Green MEPs will work to change that.
Green MEPs will:
•	Defend our public services, including health and
education, from moves towards privatisation in international trade deals (see more under ‘fair trade’).
•	Oppose EU competition laws which make it harder to
renationalise and which require the tendering of services
to the private sector.
•	Defend the principle that public services in any EU country
should be available to all EU citizens in that country.
•	Work towards changes to company law to require that
corporations consider social and environmental impacts
on their stakeholders as well as the profits for their
shareholders.
•	Support the right of workers to buy their firm as a co-op
(see under workers’ rights).
•	Oppose any measures forcing European countries to sell
off public assets and services, as has happened in Greece.
•	Oppose the European Commission’s promotion of privatisation and the free market.
•	Promote co-operatives and other social enterprises and
push for the use of planning, taxation, procurement,
advice, and company law to help to develop co-operatives
and other social enterprises.

Decent jobs for all
Unemployment, underemployment and unstable
employment are too high in the UK and across Europe.
They destroy communities, families and lives. Too often,
politicians are quick to blame the unemployed for their
situation. But Greens recognise that unemployment and
underemployment are the results of failures in economic
policy. They are a symptom of a system which believes it is
possible for a human being to be redundant.
Unemployment and underemployment have hugely
damaging effects on people. As well as impoverishing,
they impact on our health, life expectancy and happiness.
Less discussed is unstable employment. In the UK, more
people now believe they will lose their job than at any point
since records began5. This belief leads to stress and to an
unwillingness to negotiate pay rises and better conditions.
When jobs are lost, the damage this can do to people, their
families and their communities is immense.
The main solutions to these problems are to end austerity,
ensure investment in the industries of the future and to
introduce a citizens’ basic income to ensure income stability
in people’s lives and that contributions to society are valued
beyond just those which turn a cash profit. However, in the
short term, it is important to create stable, fulfilling jobs,
particularly jobs for young people.
Green MEPs will:
•	Support the EU’s funding for the Youth Employment
Initiative, and calls for Youth Guarantee jobs schemes
across Europe. We should ensure that every young person
is offered a job or further training within four months of
leaving permanent education (though they shouldn’t be
required to accept it).
•	Support expansion of the EU social fund so that it can
further support work tackling youth unemployment and

5 http://www.cardiff.ac.uk/socsi/ses2012/

7

combatting social exclusion.
•	Argue for a permanent Youth Unemployment Task Force,
sharing best practice across Europe and monitoring
changes in the structure of the labour market across
Europe.

•	Call for workers to be allowed to ballot for industrial
action on whatever grounds they see fit – the right of
workers to democratically choose to remove their labour
should not be restricted.

•	Demand that the European Central Bank prioritises
unemployment alongside inflation in the setting of
monetary policy for the Euro. Whilst this doesn’t directly
affect the UK, the impacts of mass youth unemployment
in our nearest neighbours are felt across the channel.

•	Crack down on blacklisting and any discrimination against
workers for unionising.

Standing up for workers’ rights
One key function of the European Union has been to
harmonise workers’ rights across Europe. This helps to
prevent a race to the bottom, where each country scrambles
to cut rights to make themselves more competitive for
foreign capital.
Where the EU has debated rights at work, Green MEPs have
stood with the trades union movement across Europe to
protect and extend the rights of workers. However, workers’
rights have been significantly eroded in recent years,
particularly in the UK. The rise of insecure labour has made
trade union organising harder and has put more people into
precarious positions. Attacks on trade unions, particularly
in the UK, have led to the stagnation of wages at the core of
our economic crisis. Green MEPs have been proud to stand
with workers in the chamber of the European Parliament
and on picket lines across the country. They will continue to
do so.

Jean Lambert MEP has pushed repeatedly for International
Labour Organisation treaties and conventions to be
incorporated into EU law.
Decent pay for all
Both Keith Taylor and Jean Lambert have supported
campaigns to ensure everyone in their regions gets a living
wage, and Jean Lambert has a key advocate of the European
Anti-Poverty Network‚ a proposal for a Framework Directive
on a Guaranteed Minimum Income.

Green MEPs will work within the EU to
Democratic workplaces:
•	Encourage worker ownership and co-operatives by
supporting member states in introducing a workers’ right
to buy their company.
•	Encourage through public procurement new, democratic
models of corporate ownership, such as cooperatives.
•	Push for legislation to mandate democratic worker participation in the boards of all corporations6.
6 http://www.economist.com/node/21552567	

8

The right to organise:

•	Provide information and support for small businesses to
help them recognise a trade union.
•	Call for a specific right, which cannot be waived, to join
a trade union, to have an independent union as chosen
by employees recognised in your workplace, to be
represented by that union, and not to be discriminated
against as a result of membership.
•	Ensure all statutory employment rights which are granted
to ‘employees’ are extended to all ‘workers’. This will
close the loop hole through which agency workers are
frequently excluded from employment rights.
Working hours and stable employment:
•	Support people to work the number of hours they want
to. Too many lives are blighted with either underwork
or overwork. The former leads to impoverishment and
boredom. The latter prevents us from seeing our families,
participating in our communities and expressing ourselves
as humans as well as workers. Greens will therefore push
for measures supporting people to reduce the number
of hours they work if they want to, whilst protecting
those who need more hours through measures such as a
requirement that a company seeking additional hours of
labour offer them to any qualified part time employees
first.
•	End opt outs within the EU working time directive, which
are too often in practice exploited by employers.
•	 Ensure more stable employment. Whilst it is reasonable
to need some degree of flexibility from a workforce, it is
equally reasonable for workers to expect to be able to
plan from month to month. Green MEPs will work for EU
rules requiring:
	

- That all contracts state the number of hours contracted;

	

- That overtime on top of the core hours in a worker’s
contract cannot exceed 25% of the time in their core
hours;

	

- That for each hour of overtime requested, the employee
must receive a day’s notice.

Greens will support:
•	A directive on a European minimum income.
•	Europe-wide maximum pay ratios for any one company.
•	A European charter on internships, outlining minimum
standards including that work should be paid.
•	End discrimination and harassment in workplaces

Greens will call on the EU to:
•	Better ensure equal pay for equal work irrespective of
gender, age, race, or any other arbitrary factor.
•	Demand legal changes to make it easier for women to
take equal pay cases, including in groups if they so wish.
•	Demonstrate best practice in recruitment to EU institutions.
•	Support the introduction of gender quotas on boards of
directors.
•	Better workplaces for parents
•	Expand the total amount of parental leave to a total of
23 months, shared between parents, paid at a minimum
of 90% salary, which will be covered by the state up to a
reasonable level for small companies.
•	Jobs you can build a life around
Greens will support:
•	Guarantee statutory time off for education, public service,
and voluntary work.
•	The introduction of a carers’ leave directive.
•	Moves to better support the protection of health and
safety in the work place.
•	An end to exploitative contracts such as unpaid internships and zero-hours contracts.
•	Equal work opportunities for persons with disabilities, in
line with the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
disabilities
International workers’ rights
Green MEPs will:
•	Support through trade deals, international agreements
and the regulation of international companies operating
in the EU the right of workers across the world to join
trades unions and to organise themselves.
•	Encourage the EU to work globally and within the EU for
the establishment of a fair and accountable international
labour dispute settlement mechanism.

Consumer rights: ensuring we can trust
what we buy
EU regulations are key to protecting us when we buy goods
and services.
Green MEPs will:
•	Continue to work to ensure that the products we buy are
safe, and do what they say they will.
•	Demand higher energy efficiency standards for products
sold in Europe and better labelling for energy standards.
•	Demand better health labelling of products sold in the
EU and that any imported products containing GMOs or

products from animals fed on GMOs are labelled as such.
•	Continue to work to ensure that products sold in the EU
do not contain dangerous chemicals (see under ‘health’).

Fair trade, building a better economy
The exchange of products and services across Europe and
the world can enrich all of our lives. But free trade means
freeing the powerful to exploit the vulnerable. We see
this when chain stores squash local competition with
loss leaders before raising prices. We see it between EU
countries: the policy of blindness of the Common Market to
asymmetry of trade within the EU must take its share of the
blame for the European economic collapse. Germany’s trade
surplus and Greece’s trade deficit are not unrelated.
We see this exploitation in the EU’s treatment of countries
in the global South too, as too often we force them to
accept terms which perpetuate their impoverishment. At
the same time, trade deals with wealthy countries including
the USA and Canada impose policies upon European citizens
for which we have never voted.
Greens argue for a different approach. We support fair
trade, not free trade. We support the rights of impoverished
countries to protect their industries and their workers
and to determine their own economic futures. Where
goods can be supplied locally, trade for trades sake can be
counterproductive – centralising power in the hands of
middle-men and depending on fossil fuels. Where goods
cannot be supplied locally, we should ensure fair exchange.
Britain needs to build a base of products we can export,
diversifying out of finance. Trade, particularly with our neighbours
in the EU, will be key to the rebuilding of our economy. But this
cannot happen if our neighbours are struggling.
Green MEPs will:
•	Oppose any elements of any trade deals, including
the current EU/US trade deal (the Transatlantic Trade
and Investment Partnership - TTIP), which threaten to
weaken protections for workers, consumers, citizens or
the environment in the EU, its member states or trading
partners. Health, workers’ rights, consumer rights,
women’s rights, indigenous rights, environmental protection, data protection, agriculture, food, cultural rights and
biotech should be protected by our trade deals, not sold
off. Some areas, including health, pre-18 education, and
water, should be protected entirely from involvement in
any trade negotiations.
•	TTIP removes vast powers from member state parliaments and judicial systems, and so from the citizens of EU
countries. It threatens to exacerbate inequalities within
the EU and give corporations huge powers over our public
services. It will encourage the privatisation and monetisation of a range of services, which could include education
and healthcare, not to mention further deregulation of
banking. Green MEPs will continue to oppose such deals.

9

•	Oppose trade deals, such as the Transatlantic Trade and
Investment Partnership, which allow private companies
to take legal action against governments for democratically chosen laws and rules via the I-S dispute settlement
mechanism. Laws should be set by parliaments and
judged by courts, not set in secret negotiations in trade
deals, and adjudicated by non-transparent international
tribunals. Citizens of any country should, however, be
able to pursue both companies and countries who have
behaved in ways which violate their human rights in
European courts.
•	Work for trade systems within Europe and with countries
outside Europe based on solidarity. Elected governments
should be able to regulate imports, exports and investments. The poorest countries should be treated with
particular care.
•	 Economic Partnership Agreements with African,
Caribbean and Pacific region countries have too often
pushed unfair trade deals onto already impoverished
countries, requiring them to offer large Western corporations free access to their markets often extracting
profits from those countries rather than allowing them
to be reinvested locally, outcompeting local indigenous
industries before they have a chance to grow and, often,
preventing governments and local people from instituting
protections against corporate exploitation.
•	Greens would instead work to make trade systems built
on the principles of democracy and solidarity, which
would allow impoverished countries to protect, develop
and subsidise their own industries, set their own regulations, and encourage local, internal, and regional trade as
and when they see fit.

10

power for ever fewer large companies rather than
economic resilience and justice. Where governments
wish to restrict capital flows, they ought to be allowed
and encouraged to do so. Current EU rules preventing
any regulation of the movement of capital allow for the
accumulation of power in the hands of the few. As long
as capital is more mobile than labour, standards can be
driven down to statutory minimums.
•	Ensure that companies incorporated or doing business in
the EU can be held legally accountable for the actions of
their subsidiaries overseas.
•	Ensure that companies selling products in the EU have
a duty to ensure transparency in their supply chains,
that there are no breaches of human rights or ILO labour
standards in the production of their goods, and that trade
unions are allowed to organise in their work places and
are supported in reporting any breaches of labour rights.
•	Require the tightening of EU legislation around
mandatory reporting by large companies of their global
supply chains and of specific data relating to their
environmental and social impact.
•	Tighten EU competition law by allowing member states
to prevent foreign acquisition of key industries, through
better monitoring of predatory commercial practices and
by strengthening Mergers & Acquisitions.
•	Push for stronger measures to prevent predatory
trading practices such as price dumping, which can have
devastating impacts on domestic markets, particularly in
the poorest countries.

•	Push for trade deals in which partners agree to help
ensure companies meet each other’s social, labour and
environmental standards. The EU should not be dictating
to other countries or regions exactly what these rules
ought to be, but we should likewise not be allowing our
companies to breach them.

•	Better regulate and stop promotion by the EC of Foreign
Direct Investment both from and to EU member states.
Foreign Direct Investment is often promoted as a silver
bullet for a country’s economic problems. But its flip side
is that foreign investors secure the profits from the labour
of the country they are investing in, and will only invest if
in the long term they believe they can take more wealth
out of the country than they put into it.

•	Encourage the EU to abandon European tariff escalation
on processed tropical products – helping producers and
companies in exporting developing countries to earn the
added value for processing the products they have grown.

The EU is both the world’s biggest investor abroad, and the
biggest recipient of foreign direct investment globally. The
European Commission sees attracting investment from
overseas as one of its key roles.

•	Work towards fairer distribution of incomes along global
supply chains. The current global trade system is characterised by low paid workers producing, transporting and
selling products, with high paid company executives and
middle managers making up the majority of the cost of
what we buy despite contributing more to the dominance
of their company than the improvement of our goods and
services. By supporting the democratisation of workplaces
and therefore more equal pay, Greens will drive up wages
for the lowest paid workers in the world.

Green MEPs will

•	Amend EU treaties to allow and encourage capital
controls. The freedom of movement of capital increases

•	Ensure that investors are seen as a part of the supply
chain and so held accountable for any breaches of labour,

•	Challenge the promotion of the idea that foreign direct
investment is a silver bullet, proposing instead that
domestic and democratised financial industries should
support investment in their productive economies;
•	Work for better regulation of investment to ensure that
impoverished communities are not exploited, and that
they have given pre, prior and informed consent for investment deals before they take place.

human rights or environmental standards that take place
in it.
•	Use its powers to restrict the arms trade. Whilst it is for
global treaties and national governments to stop the arms
trade, the EU, which operates as a trade block, must play
its part.
Democratic trade deals
•	Ensure that only national parliaments and the European
parliament can initiate trade deals. The situation whereby
only the unelected Commission can initiate and take part
in these processes but for a veto is undemocratic.
•	Make all trade deals transparently rather than behind
closed doors. They impact on the lives of Europeans as
much as any policy, and should be negotiated accountably
in the open, not in secret.
•	Involve the people of Europe in trade deals. The current
situation where companies with a profit interest in
deals are allowed access to negotiations and to secret
documents, while NGOs with a public interest in them
are shut out, must end. Civil society should be actively
included in discussions around trade negotiations, and
where the opinions of industries are sought, it ought to be
the trade union representatives from that industry who
are consulted first, as it is they who have the most interest
in long term, stable employment in their sector.
•	Arrange an independently conducted Human Rights
and Sustainability Impact Assessment of each trade
agreement, to be completed and debated in Parliament
before the agreement is signed and ratified.
Ensure all trade deals are reversible. Many trade deals
regularly bind policy in perpetuity. This is fundamentally
undemocratic.

Currency
The Green Party of England and Wales has always been
against UK membership of the Euro. We do not believe
that monetary policy – which must be sensitive to
local economic needs and changes – should be set at a
continental level. New member states of the EU, or newly
independent member states of the EU, ought not to be
forced to adopt the Euro and where member states wish
to leave, they ought to be supported to do so in an orderly
fashion. Otherwise, the future of the Euro is a matter for
members of the Eurozone.

Using procurement for good
The UK public sector spends over£150 billion7 a year buying
goods and services. This spend – and its capacity to drive
positive change in the economy – is regulated by the EU.
Greens MEPs have won improvements in procurement
regulations in recent years.
Green MEPs will work:
•	To change the European public procurement directive to
allow and encourage a broader range of socially desirable
factors to be considered, including support for local
producers.
•	For decisions about public procurement to be made locally
by the public body procuring, not the EU. The role of
the EU should be facilitating procurement for good, not
mandating what public bodies can buy.
•	For the EU to support the use of procurement to drive
global economic and environmental justice, including by
funding bodies to monitor the supply chains of goods
bought by public service organisations.

Measuring what matters
The EU has an role in measuring and benchmarking the
successes of member state economies. Greens have long
argued that GDP is a bad measure of economic success,
failing to take into account resource depletion, distribution
of wealth, and whether economic activities are socially or
environmentally desirable.
Green MEPs will:
•	Encourage the EU to put factors such as social, environmental and employment indicators at the heart of
economic governance by revising measures including the
Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure8.
•	Ask the EU to support member states in developing more
appropriate alternative measures of economic progress
than GDP.
•	Challenge the notion that GDP growth equates to
economic success.

7 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/62060/introduction-public-procurement.pdf
8 http://www.greens-efa.eu/fileadmin/dam/Documents/Letters/Letter_on_the_Social_Dimension_of_the_EMU_11_06_13.pdf
The revised scoreboard for the MIP should amongst others contain the following:
Employment rate at full time equivalent including a sub-indicator on youth unemployment
Income inequality
In-work poverty
Resource productivity
Capital productivity and unit capital costs
Energy component of current account
A lower threshold for the indicator on Unit Labour Cost
An indicator taking into account the concept of adjusted net saving and the ecological footprint
Education expenditure

11

PRESERVING THE PLANET
Climate change, more than almost any
other issue, demonstrates the need for
cross continental and global co-operation.
No one country can solve this great
challenge alone.
And the challenge is greater than it has
ever been. In 2013, the amount of carbon
dioxide in the earth’s atmosphere passed
400 parts per million for the first time
in three million years. Weather events
once considered extreme are now regular,
destroying crops and towns and lives
around the world. The crisis swept into
homes across Britain this winter, as record
rainfall brought with it floods and misery.
Without urgent action now, the impacts on human
civilization will be unspeakable. Yet our leaders are moving
far too slow and, too often, in the wrong direction. From
Canadian tar sands to Arctic drilling to Osborne’s fracking,
rather than keep carbon out of the atmosphere, energy
companies and governments are colluding to scrape every
last drop out of the ground. We cannot allow this. The oil
and gas in known conventional reserves are sufficient to
deliver disaster. Yet our government and governments
around the world are cheering on the corporations driving
this destruction: giving them influence over energy policy
and millions of pounds of subsidies.
The choice is stark, and there is no more time to wait. We
can face disastrous changes to the climate system humanity
has always depended on, or we can have a zero-carbon
revolution. We must invest in renewables, energy efficiency,
and public transport, and leave fossil fuels in the ground.
The Green Party has long led the way in protecting the
climate. We have long argued that we need to build a
low carbon, renewably powered society. We have always
understood that solving the climate crisis is a question of
economic policy, housing policy, energy policy, transport
policy: it is about changing the system that puts profit
before the planet. As long as a wealthy few can gain by
plundering the earth’s resources, they will continue to
do so. Our world is interconnected, and so you will find
our solutions to the climate crisis in every section of this
manifesto. But the challenge also demands specific policies
and frameworks. Across Europe and in the EU, Green Parties
have had remarkable success in securing these.

12

Natalie Bennett, Leader of the Green Party, demonstrates
against fracking at Balcombe.

Only a few years ago, renewable energy was treated by
too many as a joke. Today, the renewables revolution they
said was impossible is happening all across Europe – often
because of direct policies of Green Parties. On the global
stage, it is Greens who have pushed the EU to demand
action.
Green MEPs will:
•	Demand the EU to takes leadership in mitigating climate
change, with binding targets for EU emissions reductions
of at least 90% on 1990 levels by 2030, accepting the
principles of contraction and convergence, whereby those
responsible for more emissions reduce faster.
•	Work for renewed impetus in global negotiations.
•	Ask the EU to use current bilateral talks such as those
with the US to force environmental standards, including
banning the sale in Europe of fuels which originate from
the most polluting sources, such as Canadian Tar Sands.
•	Oppose the extraction of shale gas through fracking. We
already have more than enough fossil fuels in known
conventional reserves to deliver dangerous climate
change, and the risk to local environments from fracking
is too high
•	Oppose the extraction in Europe of other extreme fuels,
such as the deep sea oil drilling off Shetland.
•	Ask the EU to replace the Emissions Trading Scheme
(ETS). The scheme has failed, and Greens will argue for
solutions including legally binding national targets,
the banning of extraction of quantities of fuels with

which the atmosphere cannot cope and the building of
the infrastructure needed for a zero-carbon economy.
However, whilst pushing for more such solutions, Greens
will engage fully in processes designing replacement
schemes including working for a much higher and less
volatile carbon price, a progressively reducing cap on
carbon allowances, and the inclusion of more sectors.
•	Work with member states to ensure climate reparations
are paid to them, funded by wealth taxes on fossil fuel
companies, to help cover the costs of adaptation to a
changed climate and mitigation of their contribution to
climate change.
•	Support the global sharing of intellectual property for
technologies which help reduce carbon emissions (see
under ‘research’).

A low carbon energy revolution
We need an energy revolution across Europe. To provide
affordable zero-carbon energy, we need to fund a
renewables boom and a massive efficiency effort: small
local production and large scale wind, wave, tidal and
solar; loft insulation and low energy factories. This will
require funding and infrastructure. It demands that our
governments remain focussed, rather being distracted by
dangerous red herrings like nuclear and shale gas. Most of
all, it needs political leadership.
Greens have led the way on opposing dangerous fuels.
Fracking threatens our countryside and our climate and
our communities. Arctic drilling imperils one of the last
remaining great wildernesses and risks another deepwater
disaster. Nuclear means asking future generations to live
with our mess.
There is an alternative. Greens have always been second
to none in inspiring Europe to move towards a renewably
powered, energy efficient future. We have achieved more
than many ever believed was possible. But we have much
more to do.
Green MEPs will:

Call time on filthy fuels
•	Campaign for a ban on fracking in Europe.
•	Oppose deep sea oil drilling.
•	Oppose the development of nuclear power stations.
•	Continue to call for the Euratom treaty to be revised so
that it regulates the safety of what nuclear power there is,
rather than promoting the expansion of nuclear power.
Invest in the energy of the future
•	Set a target for 45% of energy in Europe to be produced
renewably by 2030, and 100% by 2050.
•	Set a target for a reduction in energy use of 40% by 2030
through an energy efficiency revolution.
•	Invest in a green energy revolution to better support
national and local renewable energy efforts, funded
through Green Quantitative Easing.
•	Support EU-wide infrastructure for renewable energy,
such as a European super grid to share electricity capacity
across scales and maximize the potential of renewable
generation; solar farms in Southern Europe, and offshore
wind on the Atlantic shelf.
•	Oppose EU state aid rules which prevent direct government support for renewable energy.
•	Continue to fight to ensure that the common market
and trade deals such as the current EU/US trade deal
do not prevent public ownership of our currently failing
privatised energy system.
•	Argue for more EU funding for research into renewable
energy.
•	Support the sharing of best practice in energy production. For example, Germany’s ‘Energiewende’ provides
a framework for success for moving from high carbon
centralised energy to low carbon decentralised energy
production. Germany has a reliable energy grid, wind
and solar are growing rapidly and citizens are now in the
process of taking over control of the grid from energy
companies9. Other countries such as Portugal are rapidly

9 Chris Nelder, Myth-busting Germany’s energy transition, http://www.smartplanet.com/blog/take/myth-busting-germanys-energy-transition/1275

DIRTY FUEL BANNED FROM EUROPE
Green MEPs have fought to ensure that the Fuel Quality
Directive stops oil from dirty fuels like Canada’s tar sands
from being used in Europe.
TRADE UNIONS WORK WITH GREEN MEPS
Green MEPs have been tireless campaigners for more
action on climate change, working with trade unions
to demand more investment in renewable energy, and
fighting to close loopholes in the EU the Emissions Trading
Scheme.

KEITH’S ANTI-FRACKING CAMPAIGN
Keith has been at the forefront of the fight against
fracking in the UK. As part of his campaign against
shale gas extraction Keith has travelled to Poland and
the United States to meet campaigners against fracking
and to see the environmental consequences of the
controversial drilling technique.
In the UK, Keith has joined protesters in Balcombe, Sussex,
as they stand against the carving up of their countryside
by fracking firms. Keith also hosted a highly successful film
tour of South East England. The tour, which saw hundreds
of people join Keith at screenings of the anti-fracking
film ‘Drill Baby Drill’ brought together activists as the
campaign against fracking gained momentum.
13

ENERGY EFFICIENT HOMES
Jean Lambert has actively promoted greater energy
efficiency measures, especially for Londoners’ whose
draughty homes contribute to higher- than-necessary
fuel bills, as well as climate change. She also acted as
an ‘ambassador’ for Build with Care, a cross-border
project dealing with energy efficient buildings, and
has been involved with promoting community energy
projects.

End fuel poverty in Europe
Too many people across Britain live in fear of a cold winter.
Our leaky homes make us sick, turn our energy bills into a
monthly terror and mean we use far more energy than we
need to.
•	Green MEPs will push for an EU wide social energy target:
an agreed amount by which we will reduce fuel poverty
by 2030. This would work alongside renewable energy
targets by stimulating investment towards bill-reducing
renewables such as on roof solar panels.

OPPOSING AIRPORT EXPANSION
Jean and Keith have actively opposed airport expansion
in London and South East England, including Heathrow
and Gatwick. They submitted a joint response to a
major Government consultation on airport expansion.
In their response the Green MEPs highlighted the
impact of aviation on meeting our climate change
targets and on local communities. Their response to a
separate consultation on state aid for aviation called
for an end to state subsidies to the aviation industry.
Keith and Jean also responded to a government
consultation on night flights landing or taking off from
UK airports.

Low carbon manufacturing

TRANSPORT INITIATIVES
As a member of the Transport Committee, Keith Taylor
has constantly called for measures within the EU’s
ports and railways packages which strengthen efforts
to bring these services into public ownership.

There are numerous examples of manufacturing processes
becoming more sustainable across Europe. One example is
the Rothes Whisky distillers in Scotland. They are now using
the by-products of whisky production to fuel a power plant.
At a broader level, the development of eco-industrial parks
provides a basis for the effective implementation of closedloop manufacturing.

•	Ask for European funds to be steered towards renewables
and energy efficiency.
•	Remove VAT from insulation and housing renovation (see
under housing policy).

On the Transport and Tourism Committee Keith was
supported by trade unions when he voted down
proposals which could have led to pilots working longer
shifts, potentially putting passengers in danger.

Green MEPs will:

On a government consultation on night flights Keith
demanded a ban on all night flights landing or taking
off from UK airports.

•	Fund, through green quantitative easing, the infrastructure needed to deliver a low carbon, sustainable manufacturing sector.

Jean, Keith and fellow Green MEPs supported
campaigns to make lorries safer across the EU,
including reducing HGV blind spots and improve
braking – to reduce road deaths and injuries to cyclists
and pedestrians.
Keith Taylor has fought hard in the Parliament against
the contribution of land-based biofuels to the EU’s
renewable energy targets, and Greens in the European
Parliament have influenced legislation to decrease
the risks associated with burning crops as a fuel for
vehicles.
Keith Taylor succeeded in getting the backing of the
European Parliament for the recommendation of 30kph
(20mph) as the best practice speed limit in residential
areas across the European Union, in order to promote
safer conditions for pedestrians and cyclists, especially
children and the elderly. In the UK nearly 13 million
people now live in 20mph areas.)

14

decarbonising their energy sector: in early 2013 Portugal
was getting 70% of their electricity from renewable
sources. The shift to renewables also has the potential to
spread and bring greater democracy to the ownership of
energy production.

•	Work within the EU to support schemes to share best
practice in delivering low carbon, sustainable manufacturing.

Low carbon cities and towns
European cities are showing impressive ambition to
become more sustainable. For example, Amsterdam has
a target of cutting 40% of CO2 by 2025. Eco villages such
as Vauban near Freiburg in Germany are an example of
genuinely green living with ultra-efficient housing, walkable
communities, combined heat and power systems and good
public transport.
Green MEPs will:
•	Encourage the EU to support the better sharing of best
practice between cities in delivering a low carbon revolution.
•	Push the EU to invest through green quantitative easing in
the infrastructure cities need to transition to a low carbon
economy.

Transport
We need a transport revolution across Europe. The EU
should be promoting walking, cycling, and public transport
use, not ever more traffic; working for goods to be
transported by rail rather than lorries, and ensuring our
roads are safe for all users.

•	Work to improve heavy vehicle design particularly in
respect of bike safety , such as requiring lower cabs with
better all-round vision.

Better use of natural resources

Where the EU funds transport infrastructure, such as the
TEN/T projects, these should support a radical improvement
in public transport, streets and infrastructure to improve
walking and cycling.

Despite much progress, too much of the natural resource
we extract or grow is sent too soon to landfill each year, and
too many hazardous chemicals are allowed to leach into our
water and air. We import more of these natural resources
than any other region of the world.

Green MEPs will work within the EU to:

Green MEPs will work with the EU to:

•	Prioritise accessibility (including for wheelchair users),
walking and cycling in all transport infrastructure plans.

•	Limit industrial processes which generate toxic or
hazardous wastes; recycling or monitored storage shall be
used where such wastes are generated.

•	Prioritise investment in the local transport infrastructure
most people rely on rather than the trans-continental
mega-schemes more used by wealthier people. De-prioritise airport and roads infrastructure spending.

•	Set a target for hazardous waste production to be
eliminated by 2020. Closed systems for processes which
use hazardous chemicals should be introduced.

•	Introduce more rigorous vehicle regulations, such as those
relating to fuel efficiency and tires and ensure advertisements and other information tell consumers clearly the
impact of their vehicle.

•	Ban surface, sea and river dumping of waste from
manufacturing or primary industry processes will be
banned. Adequate waste recycling and disposal facilities
should be provided on site where practicable.

•	Continue to invest in ports and the infrastructure they
require.
•	Ensure that the rules of the common market and trade
deals such as the current EU/US trade deal do not make
it harder to bring public transport infrastructure, such as
railways, back into public ownership, or to regulate them.
In 2007, EU rules pushed the Scottish government to put
its publicly owned ferry services out to tender. This should
never have happened.

•	Work towards an end to our reliance on other countries
for natural resources and instead support a reduction
in consumption of natural resources and a zero waste
strategy and circular waste management systems. We
send millions of tonnes of valuable resource to landfill
sites each year, and then pay to re-import them, often
at the cost of land grabs and exploitative mining in the
global south. Greens will work for a more sustainable
system.

•	Continue to work to fight the use of food for fuel, whilst
1 in 8 people continue to go hungry. Greens will continue
to challenge this destructive policy at EU level, and call for
the elimination of the biofuels directive.

•	Reverse plans to become a bio-economy – dependent on
imported biomass – which would dramatically increase
the EU’s use of land and biomass without properly
addressing overconsumption issues.

•	Oppose measures to allow mega-truck ‘gigaliners’ onto
European roads, push for better safety standards on Heavy
Goods Vehicles and for more freight to be transported by
rail.

•	Oppose the extraction of natural resources, such as
unconventional fossil fuels and uranium, which are particularly dangerous. Green MEPs will work in solidarity with
communities affected by the activities mining companies,
such as First Nation Canadians fighting the extraction of
tar sands in Canada. We will also support those workers
involved in unsustainable extractive industries to ensure
investment in a just transition to a local economy in which
they have good, well paid and fitting jobs.

Food, farming and the natural world

Greens protesting against rail fare hikes

Food prices are rising fast, yet farmers are being squeezed as
hard as ever. Hunger is driving British people to food banks,
and supermarkets have been caught selling horse meat as
beef. Globally, in recent years, we have seen food riots and
starvation whilst more of us than ever suffer from long term
ill health because of our diets. Our food system is broken.

15

It is no longer the farmers, bakers and greengrocers who
control our supply chains. The food we are sold is chosen
by profiteers with more experience of cutting corners than
cutting corn. It’s a speculating banker, not your local baker,
who sets the price of a loaf of bread. It’s supermarket profits
which dictate what a dairy farmer gets paid, not the cost of
producing a pint of milk from a healthy cow.
Green MEPs have long fought for a food revolution. We
stand with the food sovereignty movement globally. That
work will continue.
Food and farming:
Farming is a key part of the UK economy, and should be
recognised as such. Greens want to increase support for
small scale farming and farming co-operatives, and reduce
support for agribusiness and supermarkets.
In particular, Green MEPs will work for:
•	The right to food and ‘food sovereignty’, meaning people
in Europe and the Global South have the right to define
and control their own local food systems, choose what
they eat, and make sure their community’s food is healthy
and accessible to everyone.
•	Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) spending to be
redirected from large farms to small farms. Currently, the
Common Agricultural Policy makes payments based on
the size of the farm, which rewards those who are already
wealthiest. Greens will push for a cap on the number of
acres for which payment can be received, such that most
farmers will get more support, whilst the biggest agribusinesses and the largest land owners don’t get more than a
Europe-wide maximum.
•	An end to food poverty in Britain. We are one of the
richest countries in human history. The fact that there are
people who go hungry is a moral outrage. The fact that
more people than ever are relying on food banks brings
shame to our country and we will continue to work to
ensure no one goes hungry.
•	The use of CAP payments to encourage the production
of food with high nutritional, environmental and animal
welfare standards and a shift away from animal farming
and towards more sustainable food crops.
•	A Europe that’s more self-sufficient in products that can

FIGHTING FOR A FAIRER CAP
During the Parliamentary negotiations over CAP, Greens
demanded a strict limit on the amount of subsidy
agri-businesses can claim, to ensure that CAP payments
can be better distributed. Greens also pushed for the CAP’s
sustainability to be greatly improved. Despite their best
efforts Greens were outvoted on the final CAP proposals and
the EU has been left with a farming policy that isn’t fit for
purpose in the 21st century.

16

be produced in Europe, especially plant based protein and
oil crops as alternatives for imports of soybeans and palm
oil, which have particularly devastating impacts on small
farmers and the environment in exporting countries.
•	A ban on Genetically Modified food.
•	More pollinator friendly agriculture.
•	Reform the Common Agricultural policy to allow farmers
to let their land re-wild, rather than forcing them to
continue uneconomic farming practices where they do
not wish to, in order only to receive subsidies.
•	A change to procurement rules which allows and encourages public sector procurement from local producers
– schools and hospitals should be buying from local
suppliers first, direct from the producers where possible.
EU public procurement laws should facilitate this, not
discourage it. Procurement policies should also favour
food produced to high nutritional, environmental and
animal welfare standards.
•	The break-up of monopolistic supermarkets. Currently,
supermarkets have huge power over farmers and
consumers, meaning that people at both ends are ripped
off. EU competition laws should be strengthened and
enforced.
•	GM crops to be kept out of Europe. Seed biodiversity
and farm plant biodiversity must remain protected from
corporate interests.
•	The protection of small farmers and seed producers
from regulations on plant reproductive material (seeds,
cuttings, bulbs, etc) which threaten to put them out of
business and endanger biodiversity and resilience of crops.
•	 Better labelling of all products sold in Europe, including an
‘animal free’ label, so that people know what they are buying.
•	Measures to reduce the use of pesticides.
•	Encourage the reduction in consumption of meat, dairy
and other animal products, with promotion and education
around alternative diets.
•	The investigation and implementation of policies to
reduce food waste by at least 50%, ranging from regulation of supermarket to a clearer best before/use by food
labelling system.

KEITH CHALLENGES THE POWER OF SUPERMARKETS
As co-chair of the Parliament’s working group on
supermarkets, Keith Taylor has worked to challenge
supermarket power at EU level, and has called for stronger
EU action to stop unfair trading practices between
supermarkets and suppliers.
WINNING THE BATTLE AGAINST FARM ANIMAL CRUELTY
Green MEPs have worked hard to end cruel factory farming
practices, such as the use of farrowing crates for pigs and
zero-grazing, and EU legislation to include protection of
cows, farmed fish and beef cattle, and winning an EU-wide
ban on battery cages.

•	Action to prevent land grabbing.
•	Support for smallholders in the developing world.
Factory farming
Industrial animal farming –’factory farming’ – is a highly
inefficient way to produce food which damages the
environment, creates pollution, overuses water, reduces
food security and treats animals as machines, not sentient
beings. Greens are completely opposed to factory farming
and will:

endangered bluefin tuna.
•	Work with local fishing communities to ensure full
operational compliance with the ban on discards at sea.
•	Create an ecologically representative and coherent
network of highly protected marine reserves (IUCN
Category I) across European waters, covering at least 30%
of the seas under European jurisdiction
•	Ask for more intensive controls to prevent pollution and
parasites spreading from fish farms.

•	Push for policies that support extensive, pasture based
systems over the excessive use of cereal as feed.

•	Ensure that sustainability remains at the heart of the Blue
Growth strategy.

•	Encourage integration of crop and livestock production

•	Ban deep sea trawling.

•	Allow waste food to be fed to pigs and poultry (subject to
proper controls).

•	Make a clean break from harmful subsidies.

•	End the routine preventative use of antibiotics that is
threatening the effectiveness of these vital drugs.
•	Introduce high standards of animal welfare (see animals
section of the manifesto)

Protecting our seas and oceans
In 1932, the world record for the biggest tuna ever caught
was broken in Britain10 – a 798lber. Bluefin tuna were then
common around the British coast. In Great Yarmouth alone,
fishing for vast shoals of herring provided 10,000 seasonal
jobs each year between the mid-19th and mid-20th
centuries11. Not long ago, the oceans around Britain teemed
with life in a way that today we can only imagine.
But then something happened: the fish populations
collapsed. The jobs disappeared.
But they don’t have to be gone forever. By bringing
fishing in European waters back to the sustainable levels
recommended by scientists, the EU could generate over
£3bn in additional catches, and so create an extra 100,000
jobs12.
By establishing networks of highly protected marine
reserves (including large no-take areas) covering each type
of ocean ecosystem we could help bring life back to our
waters; support species’ adaption to changes in our climate;
boost fisheries yields; and support tourism and recreation13.
Green MEPs will work to restore our oceans to their former
glory. The future of our fishing communities, and the future
of numerous marine species, depend upon it.
In particular, Green MEPs will work within the EU to:
•	Ensure the reformed Common Fisheries Policy ends
overfishing in the EU by 2018 at the latest.
•	Set a global example for best practise in ocean restoration
and continue to support scientifically-based management
of EU fish stocks at international fora, such as the critically

Greens were at the centre of creating a new Common
Fisheries Policy that will help address the dangerous state
of our seas. Keith and Jean worked with fellow Greens in
rallying a majority of MEPs behind a demand for sustainable fish stocks. Green amendments on avoiding bycatch
and reducing discards of bycatch were also carried by a
majority in Parliament. Thanks to Greens, future fishing
rights will be allocated according to best performance
indicators, no longer based on historical fishing quotas.

Flood prevention: from the watershed to
the river mouth
Our climate is changing. At the same time as working to
urgently reduce our emissions, we also need to mitigate the
impacts of the chaos this is already causing. In the UK, the
most extreme of these has been drastic increases in winter
rainfall.
But heavy rainfall doesn’t have to mean such disastrous
floods. Too often, the way we’ve managed our land has
made matters worse. Our de-forested hillsides with
compact soils mean that the rain water isn’t absorbed, but
runs immediately into rivers and floods land and homes
downstream. Soil under trees has been shown to absorb
water 67 times faster than soil under grass14, while wetlands
act like sponges, absorbing water. Our government has been
too quick to listen to big landowners and cut rules which
would reduce flooding for the rest of us.
Restoring wetlands and woodlands upstream would mean
the rainwater falling on them would take more time to
reach the river. Damming ditches and braiding streams on
hillsides would hold water back, distributing it across whole
water-basins rather than dumping it all at once onto heavily
populated land or more fertile farming soils downstream.
Support for changes in farming practice and urban design
would make a huge difference.

10 http://www.worldseafishing.com/features/history-british-tuna-fishery/
11 http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/0/24709759
12 http://s.bsd.net/nefoundation/default/page/file/e966d4ce355b7485c1_a7m6brn5t.pdf
13 http://www.esf.org/fileadmin/Public_documents/Publications/EMB_PP18_Marine_Protected_Areas.pdf
14 http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/hyp.9826/abstract

17

Much of the work in preventing floods must be done
by national and local government. They must take
responsibility. This means restoring the agricultural
anti-flooding regulations they scrapped15 . It means
reversing the proposed cuts to the Environment Agency, and
it means investing in the infrastructure – such as proper
flood defences – that communities need. Floods show why
short term cuts to public spending can cost more in the long
run.
But the EU has a vital role too. In particular, through the
Common Agriculture Policy, it must do much more to
support farmers and land-owners to take action to reduce
flooding downstream, and through infrastructure funding,
it should support urban cities and towns in developing best
practice in urban planning to reduce flooding.
Greens will work for:
•	Better urban planning and land management to reduce
flooding. Between 2007-2013, the EU invested EUR 21.1
billion in sustainable urban development16. This money
should be encouraging and sharing practices which
reduce flooding for example through sustainable urban
drainage systems.
•	Better encouragement of and subsidies for land use
changes which reduce flooding downstream, such as
restoration of wetlands and hillside reforestation (see
under ‘allowing our eco-systems to flourish’).
•	Support and, where needed, requirements for farmers to
move towards flood mitigating practices, such as spring
sowing, contour ploughing and the use of ground cover
crops where appropriate; and away from practices which
make flooding worse, such as maize growing, particularly
on uplands.
•	EU support for sharing best practice across Europe in flood
mitigation.
•	Ensure proper enforcement of the 2007 EU floods
directive, which, among other things, requires proper
public access to all information relating to flooding and
full assessment of flood risks.

Allowing our eco-systems to flourish
Bee colonies are in collapse17. Between 2005 and 201018, the
number of eels in the river Thames fell by 98%. From 2003
to 2013 there was a 13% drop in the number of farmland
birds in Britain19. Between 2003 and 2012, the British
hedgehog population fell by a third20. The wildcat is on the
verge of extinction from the UK. We have for more than a
century been wiping out the wildlife in our country at an
astonishing rate. Across Europe, the situation is equally

worrying. The most endangered cat on earth is the Iberian
Lynx21. EU requirements that to receive subsidies farmers
must keep land deforested is contributing to habitat
destruction across our continent.
Globally, WWF estimate that at least 10,000 species go
extinct every year22. This is a crisis.
Green MEPs have long fought for policies to protect and
expand habitats across Europe. They will continue to do
so. As a minimum, we must halt the decline in European
biodiversity by 2020. But this isn’t enough. We should aim
to re-wild much of our continent: to restore our temporal
rainforests and re-forest our hillsides and allow our rivers
and lakes to flourish once more.
In particular, Green MEPs will work with the EU to:
•	Strengthen protection of habitats through the Habitats
Directive.
•	Better support and enforce the protection of the Natura
2000 conservation areas.
•	Reform CAP to better allow ecosystems to flourish (see
under ‘farming’, above).
•	Review relevant legislation and codes of practices relating
to the introduction of formerly native and non-native
species, such as the Habitats Directive, to better
encourage member states to reintroduce formerly native
species, whilst protecting from the spread of invasive
non-native species.
•	Work with appropriate partners to strengthen international wildlife law and to ensure that it is implemented.
•	Work for stronger international protection of endangered
sea creatures, and an end to any killing of cetaceans in
European waters. The EU should in particular be using its
economic links with Norway, Iceland and the Faroe Islands
to demand an end to their hunting of both large and small
cetaceans.
•	Protect wild plants by introducing a European Wild Plants
directive which would require clear labelling on all living
wild plant material traded within Europe, license all
traders dealing with wild-collected plant material and
tighten up import and export controls on wild plants.
•	
Adopt an action plan by 2015 to reduce the overall
impact of EU consumption on forests, and work towards the
reforestation of former upland. In the UK, this would help
significantly in reducing the risk of homes being flooded.

15 http://www.monbiot.com/2014/02/17/muddying-the-waters/
16 http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/activity/urban/index_en.cfm#1
17 http://www.channel4.com/news/honey-bee-colony-losses-double
18 http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/london/8473965.stm
19 http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/17/wild-birds-uk-decline
20 http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jan/29/hedgehog-population-dramatic-decline
21 http://wwf.panda.org/about_our_earth/species/profiles/mammals/iberian_lynx/
22 http://wwf.panda.org/about_our_earth/biodiversity/biodiversity/

18

STOPPING THE EU FUNDING BULLFIGHTING
Keith and Jean have been working to prevent EU funding
being indirectly used to support bullfighting. Both MEPs
have been focussing on the issue after it was revealed
that payments of up to £110 million are given by the EU
to farmers who rear bulls for fighting in Spain. A report
published by Spanish Greens in summer 2013 concluded,
‘without such backing [bullfighting] would probably be on
the brink of financial collapse’.
In response to the report Jean and Keith started a petition
demanding the EU stops funding bull fighting. The petition
has some 25,000 signatures.

WINNING SUPPORT FOR BEES
In the European Parliament, and in
the face of fierce opposition from
the pesticide industry and the UK
Government, both Jean and Keith
helped push through a suspension of
the use of toxic bee-killing pesticides
called neonicotinoids.

COSMETICS BAN
Thanks, in part, to Greens in the European Parliament a ban
on cosmetics developed through animal testing has taken
effect in the EU.

Animal protection
Greens have the strong policies on animal protection and
have a proven track record of action in Europe.
Greens strongly support the introduction of an animal
welfare framework law, covering all types of animalsincluding pets and wild animals – which will demonstrate
that the EU is serious about animal protection.
There must also be proper Europe wide implementation
of the rules that are already in place. This is currently a
particular issue with regard to the Pig Directive.
We also demand that animal welfare be considered as a
consideration in all Free Trade Agreements.
Farm animals:

•	A ban on the cloning of farm animals and the sale of
clones and their offspring as well as a ban on the sale of
meat and milk from these animals.
•	Countries must be able to choose, if they wish, to
introduce stricter domestic measures prohibiting the
import of products that do not meet their own welfare
standards, for example, foie gras.
Animal testing:
Greens want to see an end to all animal experimentation
and will call for an EU strategy that ensures research
funding is directed away from failing animal disease models
and towards modern human biology-based techniques
which offering greater opportunities to cure disease and
improve product safety.

Millions of animals across Europe live short, brutal lives in
barren factory farms.

Greens believe that immediate action must be taken to:

The EU must move away from intensification and
industrialisation of animal farming.

•	Stop the use of primates, cats and dogs in research.

In particular Greens MEPs will push for:
•	The adoption of higher legal standards for all farmed
animals. In particular, standards must be established to
protect the welfare of beef cattle, ducks, geese, rabbits
and farmed fish. Standards for dairy cows and goats must
include mandatory and substantive access to grazing. Pig
farrowing crates to be banned.
•	A ban on cages for egg laying hens.
•	Improved food labelling and better traceability of our food
to prevent further food scandals such as the horse meat
scandal. Mandatory labelling of meat and dairy products
as to method of production and the method of slaughter.
•	Mandatory CCTV in all slaughterhouses.
•	Tougher regulations on animal transportation, including a
maximum limit of 8 hours and an end to live export from
the UK.

Photo ©Jackie Damary

WILDLIFE TRADE DECIMATAES SPECIES
Illegal wildlife trade is decimating
species across the globe, the EU must
strengthen and enforce the multilateral
agreements on wildlife trade and use
its influence to ensure other countries
are enforcing their own rules.

•	Stop non-medical experiments.
•	Stop using genetically altered animals.
•	Stop the importing of non-human primates for use in labs,
as a step towards ending primate research.
•	Stop the use of outdated secrecy laws to withhold
information on animal experiments and ensure
implementation of data sharing.
•	Ensure that EU funding does not support companies that
outsource their animal experimentation trials to countries
beyond the EU.
•	Provide greater funding for non-animal research methods
Wild Animals:
Greens will argue for:
•	The inclusion of wild animals in captivity within the scope
of the EU Animal Welfare Framework Law, establishing
mandatory welfare standards for all individual animals,
regardless of their use or circumstance.

19

•	Greater support to build capacity in EU Member States
concerning effective enforcement of animal protection/
welfare law.
•	A commitment from EU Member States to implement
and effectively enforce the requirements of the EC Zoos
Directive 1999/22, including a robust licensing and inspection procedure and the humane closures of non-compliant
zoos.
•	An end to the use of wild animals in circuses and travelling menageries and exhibitions.
•	An end to the keeping of captive whales and dolphins for
commercial purposes.
•	The greater protection of wild animals used in TV
advertising, film and stage, encouraging strict regulation by Member States to restrict use unless the animal’s
physical and behavioural needs can be met.
•	A ban on the import of wild caught animals.
•	Tighter restrictions on the species that can be imported
and traded.
•	A fully funded EU action plan to tackle wildlife trafficking
and improve enforcement.
•	A mandatory recording of all animal imports, noting
species, numbers of individuals, origin and destination.
This data should be readily available for monitoring
purposes.
•	An end to the keeping of wild animals as companion
animals, or household pets.
•	A review of trophy hunting and the import of wildlife
trophies into the EU with a view to introducing stricter
measures to end unsustainable practices and the hunting
of wild animals held in captive conditions (canned
hunting).
•	Greater support to build capacity in developing countries
concerning effective wildlife law enforcement.
•	Increased support for multinational actions aimed at
gathering data on the illegal wildlife trade (e.g. Interpol
Wildlife Crime Unit) in order to disrupt the activities of
criminal syndicates.
•	Enhanced public education and awareness initiatives in
support of demand reduction strategies.
•	All European tour operators, travel affiliations and national
tourist boards to adopt the Global Welfare Guidance for
Animals in Tourism and to actively ensure their holiday
excursions, and related activities, have a minimal impact
on the welfare of animals, both wild or captive.
In the UK Defra has chosen to pursue a cull of badgers in an
attempt to tackle the problem of TB in badgers- against all
independent scientific opinion.
Greens are strongly opposed to this cull and at a European
level will push for the introduction of a new law, based on

20

the Animal Health Law, allowing for quicker approval of any
vaccine to protect cattle against bovine TB.
Companion Animals:
Increasingly companion animals are being traded across
country borders, yet companion animal welfare is regulated
at national level.
Greens will work for:
•	European law regulating the breeding and sale of cats and
dogs, with mandatory licensing of breeders and control
on genetic manipulation through breeding to prevent
exaggerated characteristics likely to cause suffering.
•	Compulsory identification by micro-chipping (where
possible) and registration on an appropriate harmonised
database.
•	Coordinated action on stray animals and legislation to
ensure countries across Europe deal with stray animals
in a humane way, using programmes based on neutering
and not culling.
Animals in Sport:
Greens do not believe that animals should be used in
any sport or form of entertainment that causes pain and
suffering (including psychological distress).
Greens MEPS will work towards:
•	Removing EU subsidies from bullfighting.
•	An end to animals being used in circuses
•	Action over other sports or entertainment that causes
suffering to animals.

DEFENDING
PUBLIC SERVICES
Health and social care
The privatisation of the NHS will possibly be the worst
legacy of this government. Cuts to local councils have
hit social care hard, with many counties and cities now
struggling to provide the care that disabled people and
vulnerable elderly people need. Home visits have in many
regions been cut to a few minutes a day. Day care centres
have often introduced charges, meaning the less well-off
are priced out. Whilst these policies are a consequence of
decisions at Westminster and in local government, there are
ways in which Europe is relevant.
Green MEPs will:
•	Fight to restore the NHS to public ownership. We will
continue to work to ensure there are no measures in the
EU/US trade deal and other future trade deals which
encourage privatisation or prevent the future re-nationalisation of health care and other services in the UK. The deal
as currently proposed risks setting all privatisation in legal
stone23 by banning the nationalisation of assets currently
within the scope of the market, and so making it significantly harder for future governments to bring services
back into public hands.
•	Protect public services within the EU single market.
•	Stand up to the tobacco lobby and continue to support
moves to discourage smoking.
•	Support the right of all to healthcare, irrespective of
where they are from (see under ‘migration’).
•	Support the rights of elderly people to the care they need,
including pushing the UK government to introduce free
personal care for elderly people.
•	Work towards better labelling of food and other products
which may impact on health.
•	Support the right to health and safety at work (see under
workers’ rights) including health and safety issues specifically relevant to health workers.
•	Work for better enforcement of directives on air quality.
Air pollution in many UK cities, especially London, is at
dangerous levels and a cause of serious health problems
including premature death. Green MEPs will continue to
fight to ensure no one is made sick by the air they breathe,
that there are clear ceilings in place for air pollution
levels by 2020 and 2025, and that there is action against
air pollution from major sources such as power plants,
agriculture, shipping, construction and domestic heating.

LABELLING MATTERS
Greens succeeded in introducing basic demands
on country of origin labelling, which will become
mandatory for meat. The European Commission will
also examine whether such a practice is viable for
other foodstuffs as well. A majority in Parliament
also supported the Green position on the inclusion
of nano-foods in the list of ingredients and on the
provision of precise information on the kind of
vegetable oil used which can otherwise obscure the
use of palm oil.
FIGHTING AIR POLLUTION
Both UK Green MEPs have worked continuously
alongside organisations in the UK to call upon
the Commission to investigate breaches of EU
air pollution limits. These have included the
Government’s plans to scrap schemes which were
proven to reduce UK air pollution.
Keith published a report, called ‘The Invisible Killer’,
bringing attention to the high levels of air pollution
in a number of places in his constituency. Jean
produced a pamphlet, called ‘Air Pollution: London’s
Unseen Killer’ calling for urgent action from
Government and the Mayor to tackle toxic air in
the capital which currently causes 4000 premature
deaths a year.

•	Continue to work to ensure no one is sold any product
containing hazardous plastics and chemicals they don’t

23 http://www.opendemocracy.net/ournhs/gus-fagan/eu-us-free-trade-and-risks-to-nhs

21

know about, and to limit the use of hazardous chemicals,
such as endocrine disruptors, in ways which risk their
entry into the environment.
•	Continue to fully support moves to end discrimination on
grounds of age in healthcare.
•	Continue to support co-operation across Europe on health
and healthcare research (see under ‘research’).
Supporting carers
Society is held together by the millions of people every
day who care for their loved ones. Too often, they are badly
treated, and don’t get the support they deserve. Greens will
always be a voice for carers in Europe, and will work for:
•	A carers’ leave directive (see under ‘workers’ rights’ above).
•	The inclusion of carers issues in social policy development,
including encouraging the EU to actively target carers in
initiatives like the European Innovation Partnership on
Active and Healthy Ageing, the Employment Package and
the Social Investment Package, the European Social Fund,
the Health programme, gender equality initiatives and the
social Open Method of Co-ordination.
•	A specific EU action programme to ensure and coordinate
an effective exchange of information, experience and
good practice between relevant stakeholders.
•	EU funding to contribute to capacity building for carers
in relation to provision of support and advocacy as
well as support exchange of information, research and
networking.
•	Data collection and monitoring to promote and support
sound policy development (such as Horizon2020).
•	Legislative measures to explore the possibility of binding
measures while respecting national competence and the
principle of solidarity - e.g. a Directive on carers leave.
•	Work to recognise the importance of unpaid labour, such
as care and housework, which is much more often done by
women, through an unconditional basic income (see ‘fiscal
policy’, above).

Decent pensions for all – now and in
the future
At a UK level, the Green Party supports an increase in the
basic state pension and the phasing in of a citizens’ pension,
payable to all. We are one of the richest countries in human
history. No pensioner should live in poverty.
Whilst most matters relating to pensions are for
Westminster, there are some issues relating to the EU. Green
MEPs will push for:
•	Continued support for the increasing number of people
who have accrued pension benefits in more than one EU
country to access their pensions.

•	The EU to stop encouraging blanket increases in the
retirement age24. If people want to work, they shouldn’t be
forced to stop, but no one should be made to continue to
work after pensionable age.
•	Measures to stop pension funds investing in the industries
of the past, such as fossil fuels, the arms trade and other
unsustainable industries which will by necessity be
phased out in coming years.
•	A limiting in the volatility of pension fund capital flows
(see under ‘banking’).
•	Tougher regulation of pension funds to minimise risk to
pensioners (see under ‘banking’.)

Expanding the bounds of human
knowledge
In 2013, a Scottish trade union organiser and a holocaust
survivor from Belgium were together awarded the Nobel
Prize in Physics after a remarkable discovery at a Swiss
research institute. By collaborating across Europe, Peter
Higgs, Fran√ßois Engler and CERN had theorised and then
proved the existence of a particle without which our
understanding of the world around us would not make
sense: the Higgs Boson. They also demonstrated something
else. Academia has no borders. Discovery is a social
endeavour.
The EU has a key role in supporting research: in funding
infrastructure and in facilitating academic collaborations.
Advancing our understanding of the world will be key to
meeting great challenges like climate change and anti-biotic
resistance. But the Green Party also believes in the
intrinsic value of advancing and sharing the sum of human
understanding. We support research and its dissemination
not just because of its potential to help us, but also
because, as with art, we believe that the advancement and
dissemination of knowledge is one of the things that makes
us human, which gives us meaning in the world and which
defines us as a civilisation.
Green MEPs will fight to protect the freedom and the
funding of scientific, social, and arts research, free from the
interference of the state and of the profit motive; funding
sufficient to ensure that the Higgs Boson is followed by ever
more astounding discoveries.
Green MEPs will ask the EU to:
•	Increase funding for European Research Infrastructure and
push for infrastructure which aims only to advance our
understanding of the world around us, not to, for example,
assist in the development of military technology.
•	Support collaborations with other countries around the
world in delivering vital research infrastructure.
•	Better fund research for its own sake. 3% of UK GDP ought
to be dedicated to public spending on academic research
through the Haldane Principle, which requires that

24 http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?langId=en&catId=89&newsId=1194&furtherNews=yes

22

governments leave it to academics to decide which areas
of research ought to receive funding (within the bounds of
ethics committees). Governments ought to fund specific
research into their priority areas, such as medicine or
renewable energy out of additional funds.
Within this framework, cross continental and international
collaboration are key, and Green MEPs will push for an
increase in research funding from the EU, including
more funding in line with the Haldane Principle, and,
separately, more funding for projects in line with the Lund
Declaration25, which called for European research into the
great challenges facing humanity, such as climate change
and water loss.
•	Ensure that where the EU is funding research with
immediately applicable outputs, these as well as research
processes are considered by ethics committees so that
academic communities can choose to stop research into
areas such as the arms trade or fossil fuel extraction.
•	Challenge the creeping privatisation of research, whereby
large corporations are permitted to shape the sum of
human knowledge as academic departments become
more dependent on them. Academic departments should
be properly funded by the state, not dependent on the
commercial interests of private companies.
•	Promote greater gender and racial equality in those areas
of academic endeavour which are still dominated by white
people and by men.

EU funded research is not then allowed to be patented
by private companies, and to encourage member states to
adopt a similar policy.
•	Support the development of patent pools with free access
for all, and other mechanisms to help countries to share
freely the products of our research.
•	Set a permanent moratorium on further extensions of
copyright, related rights and patent terms.
•	Argue for a new global framework for intellectual
property rights, replacing TRIPS, which allows governments to prioritise health over intellectual property
protection.
•	Push for regulations that for all medicines purchased in
the EU, pharmaceutical companies are required to publish
all trials that have been done.
•	Push for regulations that no medical service in the EU may
claim any benefit for a treatment for which there isn’t
scientific evidence as shown by replicable randomised
controlled trials.
•	Advocate for freedom of communication and the right
to participate in cultural life in the context of reform of
copyright laws and access to knowledge.
•	Support initiatives to harmonise and mandate existing
optional exceptions to copyright, in order to facilitate the
(re)use of works for individuals.

•	Listen more to scientific advisers and less to corporate
lobbyists in policy processes.

Space

Intellectual Property

•	Defend funding for the European Space Agency which,
although separate from the EU, is an important example
of European co-operation. The exploration of space
expands the boundaries of human knowledge and
advances our civilisation.

With the growth of the information economy, intellectual
property is becoming ever more important. With the rise
of corporate power, more and more of human knowledge
is owned by someone, or, more accurately, by some big
business. This means it can only be used by that company,
only when and how it sees fit. In fields from medicine to
renewable energy to software, this monopolistic system
has caused huge problems, restricting access to vital HIV
treatments and preventing the transfer of low carbon
technologies to those who need them most.
Greens have long called for a different approach. As far as
possible, knowledge should be a common treasury, available
for all to use to advance humanity. We support a vast
increase in the public funding of science and in return, we
expect the discoveries of science to be easily available to the
public.
Green MEPs will:
•	Ask the EU to require that all EU funded research and all
research done by EU bodies is published in open access
journals and to encourage member states to introduce a
similar policy.
•	Push the EU to require that technology resulting from any

Green MEPs will:

•	Support expansion of the Outer Space Treaty such that
corporations as well as companies are required to consider
celestial bodies as common heritage for all.
•	Oppose the weaponisation of space.

Higher and Further Education: The Bologna
process, Erasmus and learning across
Europe
In most of Northern Europe, Higher Education is fully or
near-fully funded by the state. There are no tuition fees26
in the Scandinavian countries or for Scottish residents in
Scotland. In France, an undergraduate degree costs €183. In
the Netherlands, it’s €1,700. In the UK, for comparison it’s
around €32,300 for a three year degree.
As a result, it’s likely that more and more British students
will take advantage of EU rules allowing them to study in
other EU countries on the same terms as the students from

25 http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/index.cfm?fuseaction=public.topic&id=1225&lang=1
26 http://www.esu-online.org/news/article/6001/212/

23

those countries – ie, often, for free.
The Bologna process brought together higher education
systems across Europe, to ensure qualifications have
equal value across Europe. So this process will become
increasingly vital to the England and Wales as we rely
on other EU member states to educate our citizens and
workforce until such a time as we scrap our dangerous
tuition fees.
Green MEPs will:
•	Work towards better implementation of the Bologna
Process commitments to widening participation of people
from backgrounds not traditionally likely to go to university – including in the UK by accepting the European norm
and abolishing tuition fees.
•	Oppose the European Commission’s attempts to promote
tuition fees.
•	Support the Bologna process and continued work to
ensure European qualifications are recognised equally
across Europe.
•	Resist attempts to use the Bologna Process and the
directive on services in the internal market of the
European Union to turn universities into factories for
employees rather than the powerhouses of democratic
intellect. Learning is for life, not just a job.
•	Support programmes such as Erasmus which encourage
students to study abroad during their degrees. Such
cultural exchanges are key to helping broaden horizons.
Erasmus has run out of funding during the financial year
on more than one occasion in recent years, and had to be
re-funded mid-year. We will push for increased funding
from the outset. In the UK, stronger support is needed
for Erasmus, and Green MEPs will support national
efforts in the UK to encourage participation in Erasmus
programmes
Schools
Whilst under 18 education is the responsibility of local
and national government, the EU has an important role in
supporting schools to learn from each other, and supporting
pupils who wish to take part in exchanges to do so.
Greens will:
•	Support schemes such as Erasmus+ and eTwinning which
build direct links between pupils and schools across
Europe.
•	Protect the right of EU citizens to an education in any
other EU country on the same terms as citizens of that
country.

Housing
The UK is in the middle of a housing crisis. Homelessness is

24

rising fast, the cost of housing – both renting and buying –
is soaring, and our houses are the worst insulated in Europe.
Far too many British people live in fear of a rent rise or a
cold winter. Coalition policies are only making the situation
worse.
The Green approach to housing is radically different from
that of the establishment parties. We support the building
of new council houses and the buying up of homes to make
them council houses. We would end the automatic right to
buy social housing, and support a shift to a right to rent and
funding for models such as housing co-ops.
Whilst most key powers relating to housing are held by
EU member states and many are held in the UK by local
councils, there are ways in which the EU can help end the
UK housing crisis.
Green MEPs would work towards:
•	Banking regulations, taxes and reforms which encourage
investment in the real economy, which includes house
building, rather than speculation on the price of already
built houses (see under ‘banking’, above).
•	Encouraging member states to adopt zero rating of VAT
for the renovation and insulation of housing, to match
the zero rating currently in place for new builds. We will
push for VAT to be scrapped all together, but this is an
important interim measure.
•	The codification of a set of rights for tenants’ unions to sit
alongside legal rights for trades unions.
•	More support for municipalities and local authorities
across Europe to share best practice in housing policy (and
other policy areas). UK local government in particular has
much to learn from the rest of Europe.
•	Investment through green quantitative easing in a
generation of new, zero carbon, affordable housing across
Europe.

FIGHTING DISCRIMINATION,
OPPOSING OPPRESSION
The EU has a key role in ensuring that all
people are treated as equals throughout
our lives and across our continent. Greens
have always been at the forefront in the
EU into being every more ambitious in its
drive to abolish discrimination from our
communities.
Similarly, the EU represents a substantial diplomatic block in
the world. Good relations with the EU are often key to many
countries economic success. The EU has a right and indeed
a responsibility to use that power to fight for human rights
across the world. Green MEPs have always stood for equality
everywhere, and will continue to do so.
Sometimes, protecting minorities is about understanding
specific discriminations against particular groups and
particular legal and policy approaches are needed.
Sometimes, general anti-discrimination principles need to
be established across society and in law.
Green MEPs will:
•	Encourage the EU to work with and hear the voices of
discriminated-against groups and their chosen representatives.
•	Support moves to extend equalities protection beyond the
workplace to everyday life.
Our policies for various particular groups are listed below.

Migration
Across Europe, as austerity has reduced living standards
for ordinary people, politicians keen to shirk the blame for
their own failures have reached for a scapegoat. All too
often, they have settled on migrants But the Green Party
has always been clear. It wasn’t migrants who caused the

economic collapse. It’s not migrants who are cutting jobs
and failing to pay decent wages. It’s not migrants who sold
off our social housing and failed to replace it.
Britain gains a huge amount from the people who move
here. Newcomers contribute to our economy and enrich our
culture. Without them, our public services and our economy
would be considerably less effective and successful.
Moreover, huge numbers of British people have taken
advantage of the rules allowing the free movement of
people within Europe. Up to a million British people are
estimated to live in Spain alone27. We believe in treating
arrivals here in the way in which we would expect to be
treated if we moved abroadGreen MEPs will:
•	Speak out against the propaganda used by too many
politicians; propaganda which turns people against our
migrant neighbours.
For EU migrants
•	Support the free movement of people across the EU.
•	Continue to work to protect the rights of particularly
marginalised groups, including Roma people and other
traveller communities.
•	Support programmes such as Erasmus which encourage
temporary migration by young people in order to raise
cultural awareness and broaden horizons.
•	Oppose any moves to water down EU rules requiring that
all EU citizens have the same access to public services as
citizens of any other EU state they are in.
•	Oppose measures relating to the Schengen agreement
requiring spot checks for EU citizenship and the de-facto
requirement to carry ID cards across Europe. These allow
for discrimination in particular against black and minority
ethnic people. Though Greens support the free movement
of people across Europe, we do not support the UK joining

27 http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2013/11/27/eu-migrant-uk_n_4350519.html

25

the Schengen treaty so long as these measures are
included in it.
For Non-EU migrants
•	Defend the right of citizens to a family life. New UK
government rules require that in order to have a spouse
from a non-EU country move to the UK to live with you,
you have to be wealthy. This is an attack on love and on
family life and we will continue to fight it.
•	Continue to oppose moves to introduce a ‘barrier round
Europe’ to stop the arrival of non-Europeans.
•	Support moves to protect those who have been trafficked
into Europe, rather than victimising them further.
•	Oppose the detention of migrants.
•	As an interim measure: revise the remit of the Frontex EU
border agency to respect the human rights of everyone
it encounters, and to include a search and rescue at sea
function. Thousands of people die on Europe’s borders
every year. We must end this tragedy.

national authorities in fully implementing EU asylum
legislation. The Court of Justice of the European Union
ruled that people fleeing their country because of their
sexual orientation can qualify for asylum in the European
Union. Despite this, treatment of LGBTIQ asylum seekers
remains problematic across the EU. In the UK the Home
Office has been found to treat LGBTIQ asylum seekers
inhumanely. High rates of refusal for legitimate claims,
homophobic questioning and inhumane processes are
rife across the EU. Greens have been powerful advocates
of a humane asylum system that recognises the rights of
refugees and will continue to be.
•	Implement measures to ensure that Edward Snowden
and future whistleblowers like him are able to apply for
protection in EU member states for revealing abuse of the
human rights of EU citizens.

•	Have a pact with countries around the Mediterranean to
prevent further deaths at sea of those who wish to seek a
future in Europe.
For Refugees
•	Have better co-ordination of the resettlement of refugees
and forced migrants. Greens have been successful in
calling for a joint resettlement programme, but the EU
must do better in co-ordinating support when there are
crises such as that resulting from the Syrian civil war.
•	Have a fundamental reform of the Dublin III regulations
so that asylum seekers arriving in Europe can choose in
which country they wish to apply for asylum.
•	Support legal routes to Europe for those seeking refugee
status, such as temporary visas.
•	Have international protection for those forced to move for
environmental reasons.

26

Jean visits a camp to talk with asylum seekers.

LGBTIQ rights

•	Ensure effective protection for LGBTIQ asylum-seekers.
Member States must correctly and fairly examine LGBTIQ
peoples’ asylum claims and support EU agencies and

The Greens have always been firmly committed to equal
rights. We were the first party in England to support
marriage equality, and MP Caroline Lucas has done much
in Westminster to fight for equal pension rights for same
sex couples. Both English Green MEPs are members of the

JEAN WORKS FOR MIGRANT’S RIGHTS
Jean led the negotiations for setting up the new European
Asylum Support Office and was involved in working to
improve the controversial Dublin 3 Regulation.

JEAN AND KEITH WORK ON ANTI-DISCRIMINATION
Jean worked on the Civil Liberties Committee to develop a
new funding stream, the Rights, Equality and Citizenship
Programme, to pay for work on anti-discrimination issues.

The Qualification Directive, on which Jean led the
negotiations for the European Parliament, has seen gender
identity specifically included in asylum legislation for the
first time.

Jean Lambert sits on the Intergroups on Ageing and
Intergenerational Solidarity, Anti-racism and Diversity,
Disability, Youth Issues and LGBT Rights. Keith Taylor is an
active member of the LGBT Rights intergroup.

She promoted new EU legislation on migrants’ access to
healthcare, the rights of seasonal workers and new rules on
social security rights for third-country nationals working in
the EU in the Single Permit Directive.

Keith and Jean have attended several Gay Pride events – at
home and abroad. Specifically, they have worked to stamp
out legal impediments to such events, successfully helping
reverse a ban on a Pride rally in Lithuania.

•	Combat homophobic and transphobic violence
•	Promote an inclusive definition of family in EU policies
•	Take a lead in protecting trans rights
•	Take action against school bullying
•	Tackle discrimination and inequalities in health
In short Greens will make the EU the world champion of
equality for LGBTIQ people

Rights for black and minority ethnic people
Keith with Caroline Lucas MP on a Gay Pride float in Brighton.
Intergroup on Gay and Lesbian rights and have fought for
equality across Europe. They have been powerful advocates
for the European Court enshrining the legality of LGBTIQ
anti-discrimination laws and tackling homophobia around
the world.
Their work has shown that European Union has a strong
role in advancing LGBTIQ rights. Greens are proud of our
track record of fighting for LGBTIQ rights across Europe. The
Green Group of MEPs, more so than any other group, have
been uniformly committed to equality, and will continue to
be so.
We also support making LGBTIQ rights a core European
competency, and would argue for a vote to enshrine these
rights via legislation in parliament via a qualified voting
majority. Granting LGBTIQ individuals their human rights
should be a condition of being in the European Union.
The Party pledges itself to advancing LGBTIQ rights
throughout Europe by encouraging the EU to:
•	Adopt an EU Roadmap on LGBTIQ equality
•	Enforce human rights within the EU

Racism still has a worryingly presence in Britain and Europe.
We see it most explicitly in the words and actions of fascist
parties like the BNP, Golden Dawn and the Front National.
Green MEPs have a proud record of standing with Black and
Minority Ethnic communities and will continue to fight all
kinds of discrimination.
In particular, Green MEPs will:
•	Challenge anti-immigrant rhetoric, which perpetuates
racist attitudes (see ‘migration’ above).
•	Actively support particularly marginalised groups. In 2013,
Green MEP Jean Lambert was slammed by the Daily Mail
for speaking up for the rights of Roma women28. Continue
to oppose the EU funding fascist parties.
•	Work to ensure new accession to the EU is only allowed
once basic protections against race and ethnic discrimination are agreed.
•	Recognise and challenge institutional racism in police
forces, including ensuring proper monitoring of Europol,
the EU’s police force.
•	Support stronger measures to combat discrimination in
employment practices and in the workplace.
•	Continue to challenge the rise of fascist groups across
Europe.

•	Complete the EU anti-discrimination law
28 http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2320898/Roma-gypsies-guaranteed-cash-hand-outs-police-protection-claims-London-MEP.html

They both worked on a new EU Anti-Discrimination
Directive and a recent resolution on LGBTI rights in the EU,
and have campaigned for pan-EU recognition of same-sex
marriages and for a strong EU stand against homophobic
legislation in third countries – such as Uganda, Nigeria and
India – with which the EU does business.
Both MEPs have spoken at rallies throughout the
parliamentary term to mark IDAHO the ‘International Day
Against Homophobia’ and have promoted more funding for
sexual health services – especially services for victims of
HIV/AIDS.

ANTI-RACISM
Jean and Keith have worked closely with the European
Network Against Racism, and the Anti-racism Intergroup, of
which Jean is Vice-President, to help promote EU legislation
and action to combat racism in the EU and the development
of xenophobic, anti-semitic political movements. She also
works with the International Dalit Support Network, of
which Jean is Patron, aiming to introduce legislation and
other measures to end caste discrimination in parts of the
EU and South Asia.

27

•	Ensure better enforcement of the EU racial equality
directive. (Greens fought hard for the directive in the
first place, and will continue to work for it to be fully
implemented.)
•	Support the rights of minority cultures, and oppose and
speak out against oppression on the grounds of religion or
belief, including Islamophobia and anti-Semitism.

•	Support moves to ensure that at least half of the people
making up EU institutions, including the Parliament and
Commission, and European Central Bank, are women.
•	Support similar mechanisms in workplaces, such as
temporary quotas, to bring about a better gender balance.
•	Support the ongoing work by the EU to end violence
against women and related initiatives locally.

Gender equality
The Green Party is proud of its feminist principles. We still
live in a sexist society, and we stand with all those in the UK
and across Europe and the world who struggle for equality
between people of all genders.
Green MEPs will:
•	Continue to support moves towards gender
mainstreaming in EU policy.
•	Work to ensure new accession to the EU is only allowed
once basic protections against gender discrimination are
agreed.
•	Protect, extend and demand better enforcement
of regulations against gender discrimination in the
workplace, including equal work for equal pay and rules
against harassment.
•	Demand legal changes to make it easier for women to
take equal pay cases, including in groups if they so wish.
•	Expand parental leave and split it more evenly between
parents (see under ‘workers’ rights’, above).
•	Work to recognise the importance of unpaid labour, such
as care and housework, which is much more often done by
women, through an unconditional basic income (see ‘fiscal
policy’, above).
•	Continue to speak out against sexism in the media and
culture. Whilst on some issues, it is inappropriate to
legislate, politicians have a role in providing leadership,
and Green MEPs will continue to do so.

GENDER EQUALITY
The Greens/EFA group is the only
group of MEPs to have a majority
of women members, and a
requirement for gender balance in
all its senior positions.
Both Keith and Jean have voted for
specific EU measures to promote
gender equality in the workplace, and against the
practices of female genital mutilation, so-called ‘honour’
crimes against women and forced marriage as well as
improvements in the way female asylum seekers are
treated. Jean led the debate and supported moves to
introduce EU gender guidelines for this treatment.

28

•	Continue to support a women’s right to choose to have an
abortion and oppose any measures to restrict this right.

•	Oppose public service and welfare cuts, which hits women
disproportionately hard (see under ‘fiscal policy’, above).

Equality for disabled people
Greens have long been advocates of the rights of disabled
people. The European Disability strategy of 2010-2020
and the EU’s signing on the UN convention of the rights of
disabled people are welcome steps in the right direction. But
international commitments mean little to disabled people
in the UK being hit hard by the coalition government’s
austerity programme.
Greens have been consistent voices against the cuts to the
benefits and services that disabled people need, and the
bedroom tax, which has hit disabled people hard despite
government assurances of exemption. Greens will continue
to support disabled people’s organisations working in
the UK and around the world for equality and justice for
disabled people.
Green MEPs will:
•	Continue to speak out against austerity. Where Greens can
use international agreements and EU rules to challenge
the UK government’s assaults on disabled people, we will.
•	Champion the rights of disabled people within Europe and
within the political institutions of Europe.
•	Continue to support the work of disabled people’s
organisations, including in development.

DISABILITY
Through his work on the Transport Committee, Keith
Taylor was instrumental in the Parliament’s adoption of
a resolution on passenger rights, including for disabled
passengers and those with reduced mobility.
AGEISM
The Green MEPs work with many organisations
campaigning for age-related policies, many of which have
fed into the MEPs work, such as the proposal for a Directive
on Carers Leave in Jean‚Äôs report on Access to Care.
CHILDREN
Jean has worked on EU rules to eliminate child abuse
on the Internet, and both Jean and Keith have worked
with fellow Green MEPs to establish a ‘Youth Guarantee’
obliging EU Member States to ensure that all young people
have proper access to work or training.

•	Continue to call for the implementation of the European
Commission’s anti-discrimination directive, and challenge
attempts by Member States to block this important
Directive, which supports equal rights for all, including
those persons with disabilities.
•	Continue to uphold the rights of passengers affected by
disabilities.
•	Support the proposed European Accessibility Act on the
accessibility of goods and services in the EU internal
market.
•	Support the proposed EU Directive on the accessibility of
public websites.
•	Work for better accessibility of transport services and
infrastructure.
•	Work to ensure the removal of obstacles to free
movement for disabled people and their families.
•	Make EU funds barrier-free for disabled people.
•	Support the proposed general non-discrimination
directive.
•	Work for the swift ratification by the EU and by all
Member states of the Optional Protocol to the UN
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
•	Work towards the establishment of mechanisms within
EU institutions to mainstream the UN Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities while ensuring the
involvement of persons with disabilities.

Opposing ageism
Both young and old people often suffer discrimination
because of their age, and both have been hit in specific ways
by austerity in the UK and across the EU. Green MEPs will:
•	Oppose discrimination against anyone because of their
age.
•	Support the European Charter on the rights and responsibilities of older people.
•	Ensure universal access to goods and services, in particular
to the built environment, ICT, mobility and public services.

•	Create a permanent mechanism in the European Parliament with explicit responsibility for protecting and
promoting children’s rights across all policy sectors in
internal and external affairs.
•	Exercise the European Parliament’s budgetary control to
ensure EU funds work in the best interests of children
both internally and externally.
•	Raise awareness within the European Parliament and
among European citizens about children’s rights and how
EU policy, legislation and funds affect the lives of children
in Europe and globally.
•	Make proactive efforts to engage children in decisionmaking, monitoring and evaluation through promoting
their involvement within your constituency and in
EU debates, and ensuring their access to relevant and
age-appropriate information.
•	Make children an explicit priority in the European
Semester and Europe 2020 governance system.

•	Continue to oppose austerity, including the specific
impacts it has on people as a result of their age.

•	Ensure that EU funds benefits children; in particular those
most disadvantaged such as Roma children, children with
disabilities and migrant children.

•	Work for an economy and labour market which supports
people of all ages to participate how they want to (see
under ‘An economy for the common good’).

•	Support implementation of the European Commission’s
Recommendation ‘Investing in Children’ in Member States.

•	Protect the right to live and die in dignity.

Children’s rights
Children might not have a vote in the EU, but it’s important
that their voices are heard and their interests never
forgotten. Green MEPs will:

•	Ensure that children are explicitly prioritised in the
implementation of regional and cohesion policies, the
European Disability Strategy, the EU Framework for Roma
•	Integration, in asylum and migration policies and the EU’s
equality and non-discrimination policy.
•	Support the development of EU-wide standards with
regards to child protection and promote the transition
from institutional to community based care.

29

Religious freedom
Greens will continue to defend religious freedom in the EU
and around the world. In particular, Green MEPs will:
•	Support the right to freedom of worship.
•	Speak out against the rise in both Islamophobia and
anti-Semitism.
•	Continue to argue for the EU to be a secular institution
whilst recognising Europe’s multi-faith history.

Stateless nations and minority languages
Europe is scattered with nations with no states and
languages which are minorities in their own homes.
Some of those nations are largely settled in their current
constitutional arrangements. Many have significant
movements for more autonomy or national independence.
Whatever the views of these peoples on national
self-government, they have their own cultures and, in many
cases, their own languages. It is important that these are
protected.
Green MEPs will:
For stateless nations
•	Support the Council of Europe Framework Convention for
the Protection of National Minorities and push the UK
government to recognise the Cornish people as a minority
nation.
•	Defend the rights of nations to self determination,
including supporting increased autonomy for nations
within the EU where they seek it.
•	Defend cultural rights of stateless nations.
For newly independent states
•	Continue to join with our Scottish sister party in
supporting Scottish independence because government
ought to be closer to people.
•	Stand up for the right of Catalan people to self determination, through a referendum as set by their assembly, as
recognised by the UN charter.
•	Push for assurances that where constituent nations of
member states (for example Scotland or Catalonia) vote
to become independent states, their governments will
be permitted to remain within the EU at least until the
completion of negotiations of the terms of their ongoing
membership, and will not be forced to enter into the Euro
unless they so choose. Green MEPs will work to ensure
smooth accession processes on good terms in any such
circumstances.

30

OUR EUROPE: GOVERNANCE FOR THE
COMMON GOOD
The European Union is vital because some
issues are best resolved at a continental
level. Solidarity between neighbours is key
to our common future and sometimes,
decisions are best made together because
they affect us all or because it is important
to work together rather than compete in
a race to the bottom. For these reasons,
though Greens support a referendum on
membership, we will campaign to keep the
UK in the European Union.
But whilst supporting the principle of the EU, we will work for
radical changes to the way in which it operates. It has been
too captured by big business. Around 80% of stakeholders
appointed to the Commission represent corporate interests.
Too much of what the EU does is in the interests of the rich
and powerful, not ordinary Europeans. The Parliament, the
one directly democratic part of the EU, has too little power
over the commission, and ordinary people and their civil
society representatives are too often excluded from European
policy making by bureaucracy and distance.
The UK needs more local decision-making. It is in fact one
of the most centralised countries in the EU. Many other
member states enjoy greater levels of local democracy.
Greater local decision making primarily relies first upon
change in Westminster, but the EU also has a role to play in
becoming more democratic and supportive of appropriate
devolution and local decision-making.

EU CITIZEN’S INITIATIVE
Keith and Jean were instrumental in shaping the
‘European Citizens’ Initiative’ giving EU citizens the right
to petition the European Commission directly to call for
new legislation for the first time: several such ECIs have
already gathered more than the one million signatures
required, including calls for guaranteed access to water
and for an EU-wide vivisection ban.
TRANSPARENCY
Keith and Jean have consistently voted for increased
transparency and accountability in the EU.

Institutions of the EU
Green MEPs will push the EU to:
•	Propose a constitution for the EU, to be agreed by
referendum across Europe, which outlines the basic
rights of citizens of the EU and the scope and limits to its
powers, but not individual polices or applications of those
powers.
•	Increase the power of the European Parliament to initiate
legislation and to monitor and force transparency in the
activities of the Council of Ministers and the Commission.
	

i) Committees of the Parliament should be empowered
to demand papers and testimony from the Council and
the Commission.

	

ii) The budget of the EU ought to be agreed by the
Council and the Parliament by ordinary legislative
procedure.

•	Ensure that the Council of Ministers makes decisions by
qualified majority voting. This requires recognition by all
member countries that proposals must take into account
the diversity of Europe and the particular situation of each
country, and recognition by each member country that
after such account has been taken consent should not be
unreasonably withheld.
•	Agree a statute defining the scope of the powers of the
Court of Justice of the European Union and accepting the
primacy of democratic decision making.
Green MEPs will push the EU to:
•	Ensure that legislation is as much as possible formed by
consensus, and said legislation when produced is as clear
and unambiguous as possible. Ambiguous legislation
that is unevenly adopted can have worrying implications.
Loopholes give governments and lobbyists the power
to mobilise against important directives and weaken
important protections. If an area ought not to be a
European competency, then decisions should be devolved
transparently back to national governments. If it ought to
be a competency, it should be enforced as such.
•	Improve the delivery of its commitment to subsidiarity. Whilst Greens support the EU making decisions
which ought to be made at a continental level, we
do not support the endless centralisation of power
into Europe. Rather, national governments – particularly the UK government – should hand powers to the
most appropriate level possible, where it is most easily
influenced by people. Devolution has been a huge success
in Scotland and Wales and Northern Ireland. Westminster

31

ought to consider how it can better hand power to people
in England, and the EU ought to support such a decentralisation of powers, not seek to become a super-state. Where
the EU has ruled on areas not within its scope, the Parliaments of member states should have more easily be able
to challenge this.
•	End the rotation between Brussels and Strasbourg parliaments. We only need one seat for the European Parliament.
•	Lower the voting age in European elections to 16.
•	Continue to support the Citizen’s Initiative which allows
EU citizens to set the agenda through public petitions;
continue to work to make it more effective and participative, for example by lowering the minimum age requirement and increasing efforts to facilitate its wider use
through better promotion and, for example, by allowing
questions on all matters pertinent to the European
Commission.

Transparency
•	Develop a mandatory register of lobbyists for all areas of
the EU.
•	Ensure campaign finance transparency for every candidate
in European elections.
•	Support proposals that will serve to maximise transparency and enable citizens to participate in legislative
processes of the EU, through better access to documents
(including consultations) in all European languages.
•	Support measures that promote the availability of government data to citizens as well as the usage of open formats
and open standards in government.
•	Ensure better access to information on EU expenditure.
•	Ensure that a parliamentary watchdog is set up to
monitor and make transparent negotiations in all trade
deals.
•	Ensure that citizens of member countries have the right
to examine any EU documents, source materials and
decisions proceeding at any time, without further justification. Exceptions to this rule should be specially decided
upon and explained publicly, including the types of
documents being withheld and the reasons for that.
•	Ensure that the EU has an obligation to regularly publicise
and promote data about itself proactively.

New EU members
•	End the requirement that new member states to join
the Euro, and develop mechanisms for those who are in
the Euro to gradually leave should they so wish without
destabilising the European economy. The Green Party of
England and Wales has always believed that monetary

32

policy is to sensitive an economic lever to operate on a
continental scale.
•	Ensure that any European country is allowed to apply to
join the EU.

Pan-European policing
Policing must be open and controlled at the lowest
appropriate level if there is to be public consent and
democratic accountability. Co-operation at higher levels
must not be allowed to undermine that democratic control.
Greens therefore believe that the role of the European
police force should be limited as far as possible.
The Green Party is not opposed to proper and accountable
international co-operation by national police forces against
such cross border organised crime, such as tax evasion,
financial fraud and people trafficking. However, we believe
this should be accompanied by strong safeguards for
individuals, effective democratic scrutiny and legal redress.
In any operational capacity, Europol should only act in
support of national and regional authorities.
Green MEPs will work to ensure that:
•	Europol is accountable to EU citizens and is not used to
evade national legislation or counter international norms
concerning human rights. Its operatives must be subject
to relevant national or EU legislation in the performance
of their roles.
•	Europol agents are not immune from domestic laws.
•	Control and scrutiny of Europol is strengthened through
effective cooperation between the national and EU
Parliaments, laid down in statute. Judicial control may
be provided through the Court of Justice of the EU and
national courts as appropriate.
•	Ensure rigorous legislation to protect any data held by
Europol.
•	Ensure proper monitoring and accountability of Europol’s
engagement with BME communities, in recognition of
the structural racism found in police forces throughout
Europe.
•	Reinforce and support collaboration between member
state customs’ services so as to effectively track and seize
goods made by child and forced labour.

Freedom online: defending the internet,
protecting your privacy
The revelations resulting from Edward Snowden’s brave
decision to blow the whistle on the surveillance of people
across the world were shocking. Green MEPs have long
fought for the right of all citizens to privacy. Specifically,
Green MEPs will:
•	Support the implementation of data protection legislation

at the EU level with no watering down.
•	Work for an EU digital bill of rights, to protect net freedom
and neutrality.
•	Push for the repeal of the Data Retention Directive, which
compels telecommunications companies to keep a raft of
personal data on European citizens.
•	Campaign to stop Air Passenger Name Records from being
shared with any foreign governments on a blanket basis
and oppose other EU-US agreements aimed at expanding
the Pentagon’s ability to monitor citizens.
•	Support legislation that promotes and protects the
fundamental right of citizens to privacy. This includes
empowering us to proactively decide if and how our
personal data are processed.
•	Support measures aiming at ensuring adequate levels of
transparency and security of data processing.
•	Support legislation that aims at removing any registration
or any other restrictive requirements on the provision of
Internet content or services.
•	Oppose any proposal for storage or surveillance of
communications data that has not been subjected to
credible, independent assessment for necessity and
proportionality or that is not subject to regular review to
ensure compliance with these criteria.
•	Support legislative proposals to safeguard online
anonymity and the right to use encryption; and measures
to develop and promote, with legal obligations, where
appropriate, the use of privacy-enhancing technologies.
•	Oppose any measure or initiative that pre-empts judicial
review of alleged online infringements by seeking to
encourage, coerce or permit Internet service providers
and other organisations to police or punish alleged online
infringements except when the measures taken are
imposed for a very short time, where the alleged infringement involves imminent danger to human beings and
when the state in which the intermediary is based is
required to take action to address the problem urgently.
•	Support legislation that prevents oppressive regimes from
acquiring surveillance and censorship technology and
services from any entity in the European Union and in
the meantime, oppose any state or EU assistance, such as
export credit, for such trade.
•	Support free, open, bottom-up, and multi-stakeholder
models of coordinating the Internet resources and
standards - names, numbers, addresses etc. Green MEPs
will support measures which seek to ensure the capacity
of representative civil society to participate in multistakeholder forums and will oppose any attempts by
corporate, governmental or intergovernmental agencies
to take control of Internet governance.

•	Place Free/Libre/Open Source Software on an equal
competitive footing with proprietary software, require
the use of open standards for information produced by or
for public entities, grant the public free and unrestricted
access to all government-funded endeavours.

PROTECTING OUR INTERNET FREEDOM
Green MEPs have been at the centre of campaigns to
protect our ‘digital rights’ and online privacy, especially
regarding agreements between the EU and US over
data sharing and retention, and helped force the EU to
abandon controversial plans for ACTA – an international
anti-counterfeiting agreement whose opponents include
the Open Rights Group and Privacy International.European
Greens have played a key role in calling for overarching
rules on data protection, which are better placed than a
patchwork of national laws, to protect citizens.

Human rights and civil liberties
Green MEPs have long fought for the rights of people in
Europe and around the world to be respected. They have
consistently called for the repeal of draconian anti-terror
legislation, and the closure of the US Torture Camp at
Guantanamo Bay. They have called for EU countries to find
a home for Guantanamo detainees ‘cleared for release’,
and Jean has worked closely with the London Guantanamo
campaign to try to secure the release of Shaker Aamer, the
London resident still being held after 12 years.
The Green MEPs have signed the ‘Child Rights Pledge’, urged
the EU to sign up to the European Convention on Human
Rights, spoken out about human rights abuses in Turkey,
Burma, Russia – and in the extractive industries prevalent in
Africa and South America.
Jean has promoted World Day Against the Death Penalty
and UN Human Rights Day.
They have used their status as MEPs to pursue legal
challenges to Israeli attacks on a Gaza-bound aid flotilla,
and on behalf of the Greenpeace activists arrested while
protesting against oil exploration in the Arctic. Jean Lambert
has worked with the Camden/Abu-Dis Friendship Society to
help secure visas for Palestinian visitors to London, and is a
member of Waltham Forest Palestine Solidarity Campaign.
She has campaigned against the police use of the
controversial tactic of ‘kettling’ demonstrators in London,
against slavery and human trafficking and, successfully, for a
UN ban on female genital mutilation.
Green MEPs will continue to use their platform to defend
human rights in the UK, EU and around the world.

•	Encourage the use of Free/Libre/Open Source software by
all EU institutions and member state governments.

33

BANNING CLUSTER BOMBS
In 2010 and 2011, Greens won support from fellow
European Parliamentarians to pass resolutions banning the
use, production and stockpiling of cluster bombs on the
continent.
FRAMEWORK FOR DEVELOPMENT
Keith has urged for a future framework which tackles
problems such as unfair international trade relationships,
the power of corporations, and global tax evasion. He’s also
called for a focus on reducing inequality, as well as hunger
and poverty, as new development targets are put into place.

PEACE, JUSTICE,
AND OUR PLACE IN
THE WORLD
Foreign and Defence Policy
While Greens believe that foreign policy ought to be
determined by national governments, not the EU, we accept
that the EU as it is has a significant role in foreign policy,
and a regrettably growing role in defence policy. Green MEPs
have consistently worked to make Europe a force for peace
and justice in the world and so long as the EU maintains its
power on the world stage, will continue to work to ensure
that this power is used for good.

Peace and defence
Green MEPs will push the EU to:
•	Move away from the militarisation of the EU.
•	Support the creation of a European Peace Corps to allow
for civilian peace-building and disaster response efforts at
times of crisis.
•	Ban weapons of mass destruction from the EU, including
France and Britain’s nuclear weapons.
•	Ban landmines and cluster bombs from the EU.
•	Oppose the establishment of an EU military drones
program.
•	End the ongoing militarisation of the EU. A union that was
established in part to prevent future wars should not be in
the business of establishing its own army.
•	End any EU funding for research for military purposes.

34

DEFENDING FREEDOM FROM OPPRESSION
Jean Lambert chairs the European Parliament’ Delegation to
six countries in South Asia, and visits them to raise issues of
human rights, democracy, trade and sustainability with MPs,
prime ministers and presidents. Greens have also fought
against any attempts by the EU to develop its own military
drone programme.
KEITH SPEAKS OUT FOR PALESTINIANS
As a member of the Delegation for relations with the
Palestinian Legislative Council (DPLC), Keith Taylor has long
spoken out against the abuses of the rights of Palestinians.

•	Continue to support the EU’s Instrument for Stability and
Peace, for which Greens have won increased funding in
the past.
•	Support youth and student exchanges across Europe,
twinning programmes, and other initiatives to ensure that
never again will a generation be convinced that another
people is their enemy simply by dint of nationality or race.
•	Establish a European Peace Institute, where expertise on
peace-building can be pooled and shared.
•	Oppose the sale of military technology, including arms
and surveillance technology, to oppressive regimes, and
campaign for much stricter regulation of the arms trade.
•	Support the current international courts and work
towards the establishment of a court in which transnational companies can be tried.

Our nearest neighbours
The EU has an important role in working with our nearest
neighbours. In particular, Green MEPs will work within the
EU to:
•	Ensure activists for democracy and equality fleeing our
neighbours are granted refugee status within the EU if
they request it.
•	Provide support for civil society movements for equality
and democracy in neighbouring countries where they seek
it.
•	Work to ensure peace in Ukraine, including offering EU
support for democratic elections in the country.

Other international blocks
The EU should be working with other international blocks
who wish to build a more just and sustainable world. In
particular, Green MEPs will work within the EU to:

DEMOCRACY IN DEVELOPMENT
As a member of the European Parliament’s Development
Committee, Keith has pushed for democracy, the protection
of human rights and environmental protection to be at
the centre of any new UN framework on international
development. Keith travelled to the United Nations in New
York to attend discussions of its future development goals,
where he promoted the Green message of respecting
developing countries’s autonomy in negotiations over new
development goals.

PROMOTING THE ZERO HUNGER CHALLENGE
Keith has campaigned against cuts to the EU’s global aid
budgets. Amongst his work to promote stronger food
policies, he has called for the consideration of the impacts
of Indirect land-use change and he has stood against the
use of food grains for fuel and financial speculation on food
prices. Keith has also worked with the United Nations in
promoting the ‘Zero Hunger Challenge’ to drive towards a
world free from malnutrition.

•	Build links with ALBA, the Latin American international
co-operation organisation.

Syria

•	Build links with the African Union, Arab League, CARICOM,
Organization of American States, Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation.

Israel, Palestine and the Quartet
Greens have long stood against a number of policies of
the Israeli state and continue to call for a just and peaceful
settlement in the Middle East, recognising the rights of the
Palestinian people as well as those of Israelis in a way that
is both fair and humane. An equitable choice needs to be
made and accepted by both Israelis and Palestinians: the
right to security for Israeli citizens should be considered
alongside the rights of Palestinians, including refugees.
Green MEPs will push the EU to use its role as a part of
the Middle East Quartet to encourage full respect for
UN mandates relating to the rights of Palestinians, and
to call upon the state of Israel to negotiate with the
democratically-elected government of the Palestinian
people, end collective punishment of Palestinians, including
arbitrary ‘administrative detention’, end illegal occupation of
Palestinian land, and to ensure that Palestinians have access
to water and other amenities, including right of access to
their own farm land. We also call on the democraticallyelected representatives of the Palestinian people to
recognise the right of the state of Israel to exist within
recognised, agreed and secure borders.
Green MEPs also call upon the European Union to ensure
that agreements of Association with Israel are suspended
unless and until an undertaking is secured that the state
of Israel will enter into the dialogue called for above, and
ensures that the human rights of Palestinians are assured as
are those of Israelis.

The crisis in Syria is a humanitarian disaster, and the first
role of Western states should be to provide aid to those
who need it. Greens never saw bombing the country as a
solution to the violence there, and will continue to work
with the EU to help bring peace to the country, not more
violence.

Helping build a just, sustainable world
The EU is a major trading block, and has an important role
in supporting movements for justice across the planet.
Green MEPs will work within the EU to:
•	Support LGBTIQ rights, oppose racism, ableism, sexism
and all other forms of oppression around the world.
In doing so, it is important that the EU recognises the
historic place of many of its member states as colonial
powers, and works not by bullying other countries, but
by supporting indigenous movements for justice in their
demands, in the ways they say will be helpful.
•	Continue to support projects to monitor public sector
procurement.
•	Push for more ambitious global climate targets, based
on the principle of contraction and convergence, under
which overall emissions are reduced, whilst per capita
emissions of richer and poorer countries converge on a
similar place. (see under ‘climate change’ above).
Development
Greens will continue to support increased aid budgets and
the autonomy of the peoples of developing countries in
choosing how to use it.

35

Join the Green Party
We depend on the support of our members for all the work we do – we don’t
get donations from big corporates like other parties.
Annual membership starts from £5 for students, £10.50 concessions.

join.greenparty.org.uk
020 7549 0310

greenparty.org.uk

Green Party
for the common good

Find out more about us on www.greenparty.org.uk
Published and promoted by Sam Coates on behalf of the Green Party, both at Development House,
56-64 Leonard Street, London, EC2A 4LT.
Printed version printed by on recycled paper by Solopress Printing services, 9 Stock Rd, Southendon-Sea, Essex SS2 5QF. Design by www.lifework.biz

