Migration and Wales:
Policy options for Plaid Cymru
February 2014

1

2

Contents
Executive summary.................................................................................................................... 4
Our proposals .................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
Background ............................................................................................................................ 5
Key Facts and Figures ............................................................................................................ 5
Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 7
Immigration in numbers ........................................................................................................... 7
Making provision ..................................................................................................................... 12
A note on England? .............................................................................................................. 13
What’s good for Wales.......................................................................................................... 14
Current Rules on Immigration. ............................................................................................... 15
Asylum seekers and Refugees .............................................................................................. 15
The legislation. ..................................................................................................................... 15
Asylum in numbers .............................................................................................................. 16
Support for asylum seekers and refugees in Wales..............................................................20
Immigration ............................................................................................................................. 21
Tier 1: High-value migrants ................................................................................................. 22
Tier 2: Skilled workers ......................................................................................................... 23
Tier 4: Studying in the UK ................................................................................................... 24
Tier 5: Temporary workers .................................................................................................. 26
Family reunification ............................................................................................................. 27
A federal system ....................................................................................................................... 27
A system for Wales ............................................................................................................... 29
Extending Welsh culture ......................................................................................................30
Bulgaria and Romania.......................................................................................................... 31
Changes included in the Queen’s Speech ............................................................................. 32
The limits of immigration policy ............................................................................................. 32

3

Executive summary
This paper recommends that:


Welsh organisations be endorsed as designated competent bodies under the Tier 1:
High Value Migrants programme.



The Migration Advisory Committee holds public events in Wales and officially meets
with Welsh organisations, including the Welsh Government, before making
recommendations to the UK Government under the Tier 2: Skilled workers
programme.



A shortage occupancy list is developed specifically for Wales, in addition to the UK
and Scottish shortage occupancy lists, under the Tier 2: Skilled Workers programme.



The post-study work visa is reintroduced, but with a Welsh specific scheme similar to
the Fresh Talent scheme that previously existed in Scotland under the Tier 4:
Studying in the UK programme.



The Youth Mobility Scheme to include sponsorships for areas of the world where
Wales has strong historical and cultural links, such as Patagonia, under the Tier 5:
Temporary Workers programme.



A federal immigration system for the UK, similar to those that exist in other federal
nations around the world. The UK Government sets immigration quotas each year, in
coordination with the devolved governments, and for the Welsh Government to then
be able to issues visas that number 5% of that total, with a variable of up to 5% if
Wales’ proportion of the UK population is growing too slowly.
The visas would be issued based on the Welsh Government’s selection criteria, which
would in turn be based on Wales’s economic needs as well as preserving our unique
identity. Wales would then also agree to host 5% of the asylum seekers granted
protection in the UK each year.
A Welsh Nominee Scheme will also be developed to allow the Welsh Government to
headhunt and then nominate specific individuals in order to match them with hard to
fill vacancies.
The Welsh Government will also take full control of integration services, meaning
new migrants will be prepared fully for the democratic, civic and cultural life that
Wales offers, which can differ greatly from the rest of the UK.
Border control will continue to be the responsibility of the Home Office, who will
agree to admit those individuals the Welsh Government has nominated and/or issued
visas too, along with removing those who are in contravention of the agreements they
have signed with Wales, including being resident elsewhere in the UK.

4

Background
Currently Wales has no ability to bring in migrants with a particular skillset from outside the
UK and has a very minimal input into the UK Government’s decisions when targeting
economic migrants. These decision are taken based on advice by the Migration Advisory
Committee (MAC), which is a non-statutory public body sponsored by the Home Office. It’s
made up of independent economists who make recommendations to the UK Government
relating to migration, especially when developing shortage occupation lists. At present a
shortage occupation list is made for the UK, with an additional list made for Scotland. No list
is made for Wales, despite Wales suffering a similar level of hard to fill vacancies to the rest
of the UK, as well as having the highest skills gap in the UK. The Welsh Government and
Welsh organisations also play virtually no role when the MAC is carrying out research.
During the MAC’s last full review of the shortage occupation lists for the UK and Scotland
public events were held in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland but none in Wales. The
MAC also did not meet with any Welsh organisation or public body, despite meeting with the
Department for Culture Media and Sport (DCMS) along with many Scottish public bodies,
including the Scottish Government. The Welsh Government’s response to the MAC’s call for
evidence seems to have been the only involvement anyone in Wales had with the process.
The Employer Skills Survey in 2011 by the UK Commission for Employment and Skills found
that Wales has the ‘most acute skills shortage in the UK’. By 2013 Scotland and England had
the highest proportion of vacancies that were hard to fill due to a lack of skills, qualifications
or experience in applicants so they have overtaken Wales. But, in Wales the percentage of
establishments with a Skills-Shortage Vacancy still increased from 3 to 4%, whilst the
percentage of vacancies which are Skills-Shortage Vacancies increased from 18 to 20%.
Looking specifically at skills and the skills gap, Wales still had the highest skills gap resulting
from an inability to recruit appropriately skilled individuals. Welsh employers are also the
least likely to engage in training of their staff of any nation in the UK. This means Wales
needs to find more of the people with the skills employers in Wales need, which requires a
combination of increasing and improving training for staff in Wales to give them the
necessary skills as well as targeting individuals with the necessary skills to base themselves
in Wales. We also need to retain those people who are already in Wales acquiring skills,
which was not helped by the UK Government abolishing the post-study work visa.
The Welsh Government also has no actual competence over asylum and the dispersal system
that brings asylum seekers to Wales. The Welsh Government cannot choose, for example,
how many or which asylum seekers to receive. Evidence also suggests that very few refugees
and asylum seekers themselves choose to come to Wales. The system as it currently stands
means that there are loose agreements in place between the Home Office and Welsh local
authorities, which have evolved over time, to decide Wales’s proportion of UK intake of
asylum seekers as well as where they will be dispersed. Nonetheless, the asylum seeker has
no choice in where they are sent and the Welsh Government has no choice but to receive
them and so dispersal is based on a no-choice basis.
Where the Welsh Government does have competence over asylum is in delivery of services to
those who are dispersed – health, education etc. It is in improving these services that the
Welsh Government can make a difference. As Wales is home to refugees who have been
established as needing protection, the Welsh Government should make every effort to
facilitate access to first-rate services that are needs led.

Key Facts and Figures
International migration to Wales is considerably lower than the UK average. In the past
decade the number of non-UK born residents has been increasing considerably more slowly
than it has been in England and Scotland. The last census in 2011 showed that 96% of
residents in Wales were white, whilst 96% also reported at least one of either a Welsh,
English, Scottish, Northern Irish or British Identity. This means that international migration
5

has not led to significant changes in Welsh demographics. In the first quarter of 2013 there
were 1,571 asylum seekers in Wales, making up just 0.05% of the population. This figure is
actually dropping and down from its peak in 2007 of 2,616 asylum seekers in Wales. Once
asylum seekers achieve refugee status they are no longer obliged to remain in a particular
area of the UK. This means there are no official figures for how many refugees there are in
Wales.
Where significant changes have taken place to Welsh demographics is from so-called “inmigration” and “out-migration” i.e. people moving from the rest of the UK to Wales and
people moving from Wales to the rest of the UK. In every year between 1999 and 2011 more
than 50,000 people left Wales for elsewhere in the UK whilst around 60,000 replaced them
from the rest of the UK. Only around 10,000 people left Wales for destinations outside the
UK whilst a similar number of people coming from outside the UK replaced them. The level
of migration into Wales from the rest of the UK explains in large part why 27% of the
residents of Wales were born outside its borders in 2011. When comparing this to EU
member states only Luxembourg would have a higher proportion.

6

Introduction
‘Asylum seekers’, ‘refugees’, ‘illegal immigrants’ and ‘illegal aliens’ are some of the terms that
have been used to describe migrants in the UK. All of these terms produce a particular
discourse, usually negative. And so whilst many terms are legal descriptions, through their
categorisation of people they become dehumanising.
The language surrounding migration has become such a key battlefield in its debate that the
Associated Press now refuses to use adjectives in this way. They note that a person cannot be
illegal, only an action can be illegal.1 Hence, you can be migrating illegally, but you cannot be
an illegal immigrant.
And yet, the most widely read newspaper in the UK, the Sun, has confronted its readers with
stories such as ‘Immigrant sponger living off handouts’.2 And the second most read, the Daily
Mail, warns its readers of ‘immigration meltdown’ in Britain.3
Sensationalism and scaremongering now seem to be part and parcel of the debate. So much
so that it has become increasingly difficult to differentiate between fact and fiction. It has
also become increasingly difficult to differentiate between economic migrants, who are often
meeting a real economic need, and those seeking asylum, who are overwhelmingly people in
genuine danger looking for safety.
But what is difficult to dispute is that the figures released from the 2011 Census show that
there has been nothing short of a demographic revolution in the UK over the past decades,
particularly since the turn of the millennium. In fact more people migrated to England and
Wales between 2001 and 2011 than the entire population of Wales. In other words, there are
currently more migrants in England and Wales who have arrived in the last ten years than
there are Welsh people. But it should also be noted that the vast majority are economic
migrants who have arrived and stay in the UK legally.
As a party we must remember that the major demographic shift that is taking place globally
represents opportunities for Wales through the creativity, economic activity, cultural
diversity and new thinking that migrants bring. But it also represents challenges to the
Welsh culture that Plaid has fought so hard to preserve as well as the increased pressure on
public services that an increasing population brings. And so as a party that seeks government
and a future independent Wales it is imperative that we articulate our policies on
immigration clearly.
This paper outlines the current debate on immigration and makes recommendations for our
policies in the future.

Immigration in numbers
Figure 1: Estimated non-UK birth/nationality in Wales and Scotland
7

Figure 14 shows that between 2004 and 2011 there has been a steady increase in both the
number of non-UK born citizens in Wales as well as those with non-UK nationality. It is
interesting to note that although both groups have risen in Wales, there has not been the
more pronounced increase seen in other areas of the UK during this period. In Scotland*, for
example, between 2006 and 2009 both populations started rising rapidly. In England too the
rise has been very pronounced.
Wales is, therefore, undergoing a more gradual change in non-UK demographics. For those
with non-UK nationality especially, the population has stagnated since 2009 and the start of
the recession. The slower rate of demographic change ought to make it easier for Wales to
adjust to migration challenges than for Scotland and areas of England.
Figure 2: Most common non-UK nationalities in the UK

Figure 25 shows the five most common non-UK nationalities living in the UK. The figure
shows that since Poland’s entry into the EU in 2004 the Polish population in the UK has
risen dramatically. Many countries in the EU chose to adopt controls to limit the arrival of
*

In 2011 the population of Scotland was 5.3 million compared to 3.1 million in Wales

8

migrants from the 2004 accession countries seeking work in their countries. The UK
Government chose not to, estimating that only as many as 15,000 people a year would want
to relocate to the UK. In fact, over the course of 8 years the Polish population alone increased
in the UK by 896%from around 69,000 to over 687,000.
This severe underestimation when predicting the number of migrants relocating to the UK
led to great embarrassment for the Home Office and no doubt contributed to the current
anxieties regarding Bulgaria and Romania as the travel restrictions on those countries were
lifted.
Figure 3: Most common non-UK places of birth in the UK

If we look to Figure 36and the most common non-UK places of birth, and then contrast that
with Figure 2, we find that India has moved from third to top of the list, whilst Pakistan too
has moved to third from fourth. Both populations are also several hundreds of
thousands higher than those for nationality from these countries. This is also the
case for Germany. This is because many of those who were born in India, Pakistan and
Germany have since become British nationals, or in the case of Germany because many of
those counted were born to UK service personnel and have never held German citizenship.
In England and Wales 55.1% of those born in India, 68.8% in Pakistan and 56.8% in
Germany hold British passports. This represents a more permanent change in demographics
than the figures for nationality would suggest. Meanwhile only 24% of those born in Ireland
hold British passports and just 4.9% of those born in Poland.7This could mean either that
these groups do not plan to permanently stay in the UK or that membership of the EU makes
holding a British passport less necessary.

9

Figure 4: Most common non-UK born populations in Wales

The demographic changes in the rest of the UK are largely mirrored in Wales: see Figure 4 8,
although the numbers are significantly less than those in England. According to the most
recent census in 20119 96% of the population in Wales is white, a drop of two percentage
points since 2001. 96% is higher than in any of the regions of England and 10 percentage
points higher than in England and Wales as a whole. No other ethnic group in fact makes up
higher than 0.6% of the population in Wales.
7.5 million usual residents in England and Wales were born outside the UK in 2011 and just
over half (3.8 million) arrived between 2001 and 2011. It is, therefore, evident that England
has received a large number of international migrants during this time.
But when we look at the numbers in Wales, what we can conclude is that the same level of
international migration that has taken place in England has simply not happened here. 96%
of usual residents in 2011 reported at least one of either a Welsh, English, Scottish, Northern
Irish or British identity.10
Religion in Wales tells a similar story. Across the border in England far-right groups such as
the EDL have highlighted the Islamophobia that exists there. There is a danger of this
sentiment spilling over into Wales. The Census 2011 does show that the Islamic population
of Wales has doubled over 10 years and now stands at 45,950.11 On the face of it that sounds
like a large number but this is just 1.5% of the Welsh population. Many of the Muslim
population live in Cardiff, where they make up 6.2% of the population12, with little presence
of Islam elsewhere in Wales. What these figures mean are that out of every 100 people in
Wales, it is statistically likely that 98 to 99 of them will not be Muslim. The number of Sikhs
has also doubled but still they make up only 0.3% of the Welsh population. So we see that
religious changes that have taken place elsewhere in the UK have also not taken place to the
same degree here.
And yet, the 2011 Census also shows that only 66% per cent of residents in Wales selected
Welsh as a national identity (either on its own or in combination with others). This is, in
fact, less than the 70% of people in England who selected English as a national identity,

10

which suggests that proportionately more people in England feel English than people in
Wales feel Welsh.
But if EU membership has not led to significantly more Europeans living in Wales, and if the
international migration into England has had little demographic effect on Wales, then how
do we explain such low levels of Welshness in Wales?
The answer to this is given in the Census reports themselves which state:
‘This difference in the reporting of national identity in Wales and England may be linked to UK
internal migration patterns; 21 per cent (636,000) of the Wales usually resident population was
born
in England, while one per cent (507,000) of the England usually resident population was born in
Wales.’13 (author’s emphasis).

Cross border healthcare and birth will negate some of the 636,000 people born in England
because it will be the case that some of this population were simply born in hospitals over the
border to a Welsh family and identify as Welsh. But the numbers born in England have
increased by one percentage point from 2001 to 21% and in reality this figure demonstrates
the significant number of people from England who are migrating to Wales. The 507,000
residents in England who were born in Wales also gives an indication of the numbers of
Welsh people who have migrated to England. Immigration for Wales is not, therefore, simply
about the numbers of people moving into Wales but also the numbers moving out.
This phenomenon is best evidenced in Figure 5 below:
Figure 5: Internal/External in-migration and out-migration for Wales (year
ending)

In Figure 514 the blue line shows the numbers of people migrating to Wales from outside the
UK between 1999 and 2011, which is in fact declining from its peak in 2008. The red line

11

shows the number of people emigrating from Wales to countries outside the UK. Both lines
are low and would not represent a significant change in Welsh demographics.
Where the big changes can be seen is in the green and purple lines which show migration
into Wales from other countries in the UK, so called “internal” migration or “in-migration”,
as well as the numbers of people emigrating from Wales to other countries in the UK. These
numbers suggest that in any given year over 50,000 people emigrate from Wales to England,
Scotland or Northern Ireland and that they are typically replaced by over 60,000 people
from those countries each year. This number has been decreasing slightly in the last five
years but the numbers of people migrating to Wales from other countries in the UK remains
high – and considerably more than migration from outside the UK.
This data is somewhat crude because it does not tell us anything about the nationalities of
those moving. It is based on patient records and so when a person’s medical records are
moved from a GP practice from one of the other countries of the UK to a practice in Wales,
this counts as internal migration into Wales. But this person could be a Welsh person
moving back to Wales.
And yet regardless of specific data on the individuals involved in these population flows, the
data goes some way to explaining how 27% of the population of Wales was born outside the
country in 2011. It is for this reason that if Wales was an independent country in the EU it
would have the second highest number of foreign born residents of any country. So whilst we
may have the lowest number of residents born outside the UK of any of the four nations at
4.9% (with Northern Ireland at 5.7%, Scotland at 6.4% and England at 12.6%) 15 the
percentage of residents in Wales born outside the Welsh border is by far the highest of any of
the four nations in the UK.
Figure 6: Percentage of residents in EU27 that are foreign born16

Making provision
The numbers of migrants who have settled in England and Wales has led to demands on
public services, which must be taken into account. For example, in 2001 there were only 896
live births to Polish mothers in England and Wales. This had risen to 20,495 per year by 2011
after Poland joined the EU in 2004. However, it should also be noted that our aging

12

population is leading to ever increasing demands on our health service, which is often met by
economic migrant workers.
Overall in England and Wales 25.5% of live births are now to non-UK born mothers. London
represents the highest area proportionally with 56.7% of live births to non-UK mothers. In
Newham this figure is 77%.
The 2011 Census also showed that the populations of Wales and England have increased over
the past ten years but that the fertility rate of UK-born women is 1.90 children per woman.
This represents less than replacement levels. Women born outside the UK have a higher
fertility rate of 2.29 children each. This means that the increases in live births in England
and Wales result ‘solely from a rise in births to non-UK born mothers…’17 With just over half
of the migrants in England and Wales having arrived since 2001 it is clear that adequate
provision for these increases must be made to meet the demand.
Nonetheless, in Wales only 10.7% of live births are to non-UK born mothers. Only Cardiff is
comparable to England where 25.1% of live births are to non-UK born mothers. At the other
end of the spectrum we see the figure in Rhondda Cynon Taf is 4.4%.18 And so again it is
evident that the demographic changes taking place in other areas of the UK have simply not
manifested themselves in Wales.

A note on England?
The key for Wales is to ensure that popular opinion is not swept up in the debate happening
in England. This is difficult because of the predominance of the English media in Wales.
Figure 7: Percentage of live births in England and Wales to mother born
outside the UK19

Nonetheless, we must explore the facts about the level of immigration that has taken place in
England. During New Labour’s years in government immigration increased significantly and
what is likely to be irreversible change took place (see Figure 7). Literally millions of new

13

people arrived from around the world who have started families and now call the United
Kingdom home.
In places like Lincolnshire, an agricultural area that now sees close to 100% of agricultural
labour carried out by Portuguese and eastern European migrants, UKIP is starting to win
large numbers of votes and council seats by focussing on immigration in the area.
We need to remember that one of the defining characteristics of stress is a loss of control and
accept that some communities are under stress and feel disempowered as a result of
immigration.
Plaid Cymru is a party that believes in empowering local communities. This is not just a
buzzword but comes from a genuine desire to give people greater control over their lives. Our
leader Leanne Wood was elected with precisely this mandate; to deliver real independence,
which was best expressed through her Greenprint for the Valleys. In essence, real
independence means not just independence for Wales but means people living independent
lives. This real independence paradigm must be translated into all aspects of policy and that
includes immigration.
We understand the need to protect culture. But international migration does not represent
the same existential threat to Welsh culture as has been experienced in the past. In fact, it
has every opportunity to enrich it. Nonetheless, whilst there will always be those who favour
rapid change and who thrive in a multicultural environment for many people change,
particularly when related to migration, is something that they prefer to happen gradually.
We understand the need to get our unemployed people into work, which will always be our
top priority. At a time of high unemployment and poor economic performance this is even
more important.
This is why the debate on immigration must be based on an understanding that the
overwhelming majority of migrants are ordinary people looking for work or a safe place to
live. The demonisation of immigrants must stop and the demonisation of those who want to
talk about migration must also stop in order to have an honest and open debate/

What’s good for Wales
The fact is that for Wales it is difficult to identify a significant problem from international
migration.
It is certainly the case that there are communities in Wales that have received relatively large
numbers of migrants from outside the UK, which may have led to competition for jobs and
houses. But this has not been the experience for the overwhelming majority in Wales.
The statistics show that Wales’s experience of immigration is considerably different to that of
England and so a one-size-fits-all policy for both could be counterproductive. The
suggestions for an immigration policy for Plaid and for Wales will, therefore, need to take
account of the unique circumstances of Wales and move beyond the scaremongering taking
place in the mostly English press. We must be working towards what is in the Welsh national
interest.

14

Current Rules on Immigration.
Asylum seekers and Refugees
Wales has a long and proud history of offering refuge to people from throughout the world.
In the 19th Century Jewish people fleeing from Russia and eastern Europe settled in Cardiff,
Newport and Swansea. The First World War and the Spanish Civil War resulted in further
groups seeking safety in Wales. World War II led to Wales welcoming more Jewish people
who were fleeing the Nazis as well as Belgians, Poles, Spaniards and Italians who settled
during and after the war. Since that time migrants have arrived from a diverse range of
countries including Vietnam, the former Yugoslavia and Chile.
A population of Yemenis and Somalis has existed in Cardiff for over a hundred years as a
result of seamen from these countries working on the boats of the British Empire that
exported coal from Cardiff’s docks. The Somali population in Cardiff has since grown with
the addition of people from Somaliland seeking refuge from the civil war there.20 The cities
of south Wales have also received a number of migrants from the Indian subcontinent in
more recent times.

The legislation.
In 1951 the UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees was agreed, which was signed
by the United Kingdom. This convention established the criteria by which asylum should be
granted and is still followed by the UK today. The criteria are as follows:
Owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his
nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection
of that country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his
former habitual residence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing to such fear, is
unwilling to return to it.21

Hence an asylum seeker is a person who has applied for asylum under this criterion and is
awaiting a decision from the Home Office. In order to make an application they must declare
their wish to do so upon arrival at any UK port (including airports) or at the Asylum
Screening Unit in Croydon, London. If their application is successful that person then
becomes a refugee.
In 1999 the Immigration and Asylum Act came into force in the UK, which established the
policy of dispersal. Prior to this, asylum seekers were almost exclusively concentrated in
London and the south east of England, which the dispersal system attempts to overcome. For
Wales this means that asylum seekers are sent to an Initial Accommodation Centre in Cardiff
before then either being given accommodation in Cardiff or being further dispersed to
Swansea, Newport or Wrexham.22
In 2006 the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act came into force. The act had a large
focus on terrorism, giving the UK government the ability to strip duel nationals of their UK
citizenship. It also requires that any person who has carried out, or encouraged others to
carry out, "acts of committing, preparing or instigating terrorism" is denied asylum. 23 This
has been highlighted as potentially problematic because those fighting repressive regimes
could be included in this. All ANC members who fought Apartheid South Africa, for example,
would have been denied asylum under this act.
15

The act also infantilises asylum seekers by prohibiting actual currency being given to those
who receive Section 4 support. Instead they are given vouchers to spend.

Asylum in numbers
In the first quarter of 2013 Home Office figures show that there were just 1,571 asylum
seekers in Wales. This is a drop from the peak of 2,616 in the first quarter of 2007. 24
Assuming that the population of Wales is still close to the 3.1 million the ONS last predicated
for mid-201225 this would mean that at the beginning of 2013 asylum seekers made up
just 0.05% of the Welsh population. Of this small population the top five countries of
origin were the People’s Republic of China, Pakistan, Iran, Nigeria and Afghanistan.26Cardiff
receives roughly half of the asylum seekers in Wales.27 The same source also estimates that
there are up to 10,000 refugees in Wales at any given time but unfortunately there is no
statistical record of refugees living in Wales. Unlike asylum seekers, refugees are not
required to live in a particular area of the UK and so it is not clear how many asylum seekers
who successfully achieve refugee status then choose to stay within Wales.
Figure 7: Long-term trends in asylum applications in the UK

Figure 728 shows that, perhaps contrary to popular belief, applications for asylum in the UK
have dropped significantly from their peak in 2002 when they were over 80,000. It should
also be noted that the previous decade has been a particularly violent and tumultuous one,
with the UK engaged in two major and highly questionable military campaigns in
Afghanistan and in Iraq. The UK, was obliged, for example, to relocate Iraqi interpreters who
had worked with UK forces under a targeted assistance scheme. Afghan interpreters are now
calling for this same right.29 It can, therefore, be legitimately argued that Britain’s foreign
policy often creates the need for asylum and that a less aggressive foreign policy should be
the starting point for reducing cases of asylum. Regardless, by 2010 applications had
dropped below 20,000 for the first time in a decade.
Nonetheless, something of a moral panic around asylum seekers seemed to be stoked up by
the media and the far-right parties. The former leader of the Conservatives in Wales, Nick
Bourne, even described Britain as being “swamped” by asylum-seekers.30 Such consistent
and negative coverage of asylum in the UK perhaps explains the polls showing that 62% of
the UK public is likely to think of asylum seekers when considering immigration, despite
them only making up 4% of immigrants in the UK.31 But the data shows that even at the
beginning of the last decade when applications were high the overwhelming majority of
applications for refugee status were refused (see Figure 8)32.
16

17

Figure 8: Outcome of asylum applications

In recent times the percentage of refusals has decreased but so has the number of
applications. This has gone along with a genuine hardening of attitudes and policies towards
immigration rather than a softer touch, which suggests that those applications being received
are from people in serious need of help. Furthermore, of those initially refused around 30%
are successfully overturned on appeal. Any hysteria over so-called “bogus asylum seekers” is,
therefore, becoming less credible. The quality and trustworthiness of the highly politicised
immigration system, however, continues to be called into question.
Figure 9: Top 10 nationalities applying for asylum in 2012

Figure 933 shows the top 10 countries of origin for asylum seekers in the UK in 2012. The
majority are from countries where Islam is the predominant religion and all suffer either
from violence, repression, persecution based on ethnic group or religious beliefs and/or
persecution of minorities in general. Again, this suggests that there is validity to these claims
for asylum and that the UK is in fact providing a safe haven for many genuine refugees, with
Wales playing its part in that.

18

Figure10: Top 10 EU countries receiving asylum applications in 2012 (includes
dependents).

Figure1034 shows the number of applications to EU countries in 2012. The United Kingdom
is the third largest EU country, both by population and size of the economy, yet it received
only the fourth highest number of applications for asylum in 2012. In fact it received less
than half of both Germany and France. It also received 16,400 less applications than Sweden,
which has a population size considerably less than the UK. Combined those three countries
accounted for 60% of asylum applications.
It should also be noted, however, that in 2011 the United Kingdom made the highest number
of positive decisions for protection in the EU:





UK 14,360
Germany 13,045
France 10,470
Sweden 10,625.35

But by 2012 we can see a marked shift in these figures. If we look at the number of positive
decisions for protection at first instance then we find:





Germany 17,140
Sweden 12,400
France 8,655
UK 7,73536

The majority of asylum seekers are, therefore, going to other countries in Europe.
As a final thought it is worth noting that in 2011 Afghans and Iraqis were the two
nationalities granted most protection in the EU. They come from two countries that the UK
is either currently at war in or recently illegally went to war in. And yet, of the 13,000
Afghans granted protection in 2011 in the EU 3,100 were to Germany, 2,700 were to Sweden,
1,800 were to Austria, 1,400 to the Netherlands and only 1,000 were to the UK. Of the 9000
Iraqis registered, Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium all received more than the UK. If
we look across the EU then Iraqis or Afghans were the largest group granted protection in 17
of the 27 member states, although not in the UK.37

19

And so it is the other countries of the EU who have accepted the biggest share of asylum
seekers and refugees as a result of Britain’s highly questionable and at times illegal military
adventures.

Support for asylum seekers and refugees in Wales
Support to new arrivals may be offered by largely unfunded refugee community
organisations as well other voluntary sector agencies that are funded to provide services,
with coordination taking place at various levels via local authorities and strategic migration
partnership structures. There are several refuge community organisations in Wales such as
Adamsdown African Association, African Friendship Association, African Light Association,
the Congolese Community of Wales, Darfur Community in Wales, Eritrean Community in
Swansea and the Persian Welsh Cultural Society. There are also many other organisations
that provide support to refugees and asylum seekers, including Women Seeking Sanctuary,
African Community Centre, Oasis, SBASSG, Cyrenians Cymru, City of Sanctuary, Displaced
People in Action, and WRASSG.
These organisations receive little or no funding and so run on very limited budgets. They do
extremely important work in bridging the gap between services for typically isolated and
vulnerable refugees and asylum seekers as well as recently arrived economic migrants.
Migrant organisations have also grown who seek to advocate for and provide services for EU
migrants. The Welsh Government has also begun offering further support to asylum seekers,
some of which differs from UK policy. This amounts to the Welsh Government offering free
ESOL provision (English for speakers of Other Languages) – there are restrictions elsewhere
in the UK. Both primary and secondary healthcare is also provided for failed asylum seekers
by Welsh NHS boards following a Welsh Government decision. The NHS in England has
been directed by the Department of Health to charge failed asylum seekers for healthcare
treatment, effectively excluding failed asylum seekers from the healthcare system.38
The Welsh Government has also developed a Refugee Inclusion Strategy, 39 which was
published in 2008. In 2011 the One Wales Government, with Plaid Cymru, further published
the Refugee Inclusion Strategy Action Plan.
These developments aside, the Welsh Government has no actual competence over asylum.
The Welsh Government cannot choose, for example, how many or which asylum seekers to
receive. Evidence also suggests that very few refugees and asylum seekers themselves choose
to come to Wales.40 The system as it currently stands means that there are loose agreements
in place between the Home Office and Welsh local authorities, which have evolved over time,
to decide Wales’s proportion of UK intake of asylum seekers as well as where they will be
dispersed. Nonetheless, the asylum seeker has no choice in where they are sent and the
Welsh Government has no choice but to receive them and so dispersal is based on a nochoice basis.
Where the Welsh Government does have competence over asylum is in delivery of services to
those who are dispersed – health, education etc. It is in improving these services that the
Welsh Government can make a difference. As Wales is home to refugees who have been
established as needing protection, the Welsh Government should make every effort to
facilitate access to first-rate services that are needs led.
In the first major survey of refugees living in Wales, published in 2009, the following
recommendations were made to the Welsh Government:
20








Tackle sub-standard accommodation and ensure refugees are not effectively
homeless
Deal with the specific barriers to accessing appropriate English language training
courses
Remove barriers to education and training
Increase access to volunteering, especially outside the refugee sector
Reduce racism and discrimination in finding employment and in the workplace
Improve reporting of, and response to, racist incidents41

There are also many other areas that affect asylum seekers and refugees where the Welsh
Government could have a positive impact such as access and cost of childcare,
transportation, timing of ESOL and training classes and introduction of women only classes.
However, the Welsh Government has no actual legislative competence over housing for
asylum seekers. When housing an asylum seeker accommodation is provided free of charge
whilst the claim is considered but the contract is between the Home Office and private
accommodation providers. These are typically global security companies such as G4S and
Clearsprings, who are also widely involved in controversial elements of the privatised
criminal justice system. This means that the Welsh Government cannot intervene in where
housing for asylum seekers is bought in Wales, where they are dispersed to or in making
improvements to sub-standard properties. Involving the Welsh Government in these areas
and questioning the privatisation of the asylum process should be a high priority for the
party.
Furthermore, asylum seekers are barred from working unless given permission by the Home
Office. Refugees are permitted to work but with less than a third of refugees employed during
the last survey (31.7%) and most of those underemployed we see how vulnerable they are,
particularly during times of recession and austerity. It is very important, therefore, that the
Party of Wales ensures that adequate care and provision is given to asylum seekers and
refugees, especially during such tough budgetary times, and that we do not renege on our
international commitments to those seeking protection in Wales.

Immigration
As has already been established, during New Labour’s time in office immigration to the UK
rose dramatically, with over 3 million new arrivals. There has been much speculation about
the cause of this rise. Certain media outlets have reported on a document that was made
available under a Freedom of Information request, which suggests Labour had a deliberate
open-door policy in order to make the UK “truly multicultural”, with controls contrary to its
policy objectives.42 The Independent also suggests that Labour’s motivation may have been
influenced by their knowledge that migrants and their descendants are much more likely to
vote Labour.43
Immigration became a matter of increasing public concern for a variety of reasons. In IpsosMORI’s monthly poll on the most important issues facing Britain we find that in 1999 fewer
than 5% of their sample named immigration, which includes race relations, as one of the
“most important issues”. At its peak in December 2007 this had risen to 46% of respondents.
Concern has reduced somewhat since that time as the recession took hold. This is why the

21

economy has risen dramatically to the top of the list. Nonetheless, immigration is still
consistently in the top four of the most important issues to people according to these polls.44
Given the rising feeling of concern towards the level of migration to the UK at that time it is
little wonder that Labour went on to phase in a points-based system between 2008 and
2010, which replaced all previous work and immigration schemes. The scheme establishes a
five tier structure with various criteria for migrants based on a points system including skill
shortages; although Tier 3 for low-skilled workers has never actually been enacted due to the
ready supply of such migrants from the European Economic Area. In effect, therefore, it is a
four tier system.

Tier 1: High-value migrants
Those under Tier 1 are deemed high-value migrants and come under various sub-headings.
Those currently in operation are Exceptional Talent, Entrepreneur, Investor,
General and Graduate Entrepreneur.45 The General category is also now closed to
those migrants who are not already in the UK.
Points are typically awarded based upon attributes, English language skills and maintenance
i.e. funding during the stay (note: Welsh language skills are not taken into account).
Under the Graduate Entrepreneur scheme 2000 places are allocated annually as follows:


900 places allocated to qualifying Higher Education Institutions for graduates in any
subject, known as General endorsements;



1,000 places allocated to qualifying Higher Education Institutions for MBA
graduates, known as MBA endorsements; and



100 places allocated to UKTI for overseas graduates, known as Global
endorsements.46

Participating Higher Education Institutions, who are highly trusted sponsors, will be
allocated up to 10 endorsements per institution. Many institutions across Wales meet the
highly trusted sponsor criteria.†
Under the Exceptional Talent sub-category every application must be endorsed by a
‘designated competent body’. Between the 6th of April 2013 and the 5th of April 2014 these
endorsements will be limited to 1000. There are only four designated competent bodies with
endorsements divided up as follows:




Royal Society, 300 endorsements
Arts Council England, 300 endorsements
British Academy, 200 endorsements

†

For a list of those institutions visit
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/documents/employersandsponsors/pointsbasedsystem/regi
sterofsponsorseducation

22



Royal Academy of engineering, 200 endorsements.

Why these institutions in particular are the designated bodies is currently unclear and
requires further research but needless to say none of them are based in Wales and it seems
peculiar that the Arts Council England would be granted 300 endorsements whilst the Arts
Council of Wales is granted none.
Under the Entrepreneur scheme applicants must again meet the minimum points set and
effectively have proven access to £200,000 in funding.47 There is no limit to the number of
applications that can be made under this category.
Under the Investment sub-category of Tier 1, applicants must demonstrate an ability to
invest £1 million in the UK.48 There is no limit to the number of these applicants.

Tier 2: Skilled workers
Tier 2 is for skilled workers coming to the UK. Again it has various sub-headings including
for ministers of religion and sports people. However, Tier 2 General is most in use and is
there for ‘foreign nationals who have been offered a skilled job to fill a gap in the workforce
that cannot be filled by a settled worker.’49
Between the 6th of April 2013 and the 5th of April 2014 there will be a maximum of 20,700
skilled workers who can come to the UK under the scheme who must be paid under
£152,100. There is no limit for those paid over this wage.50
Applicants must again score a set level of points under attributes, English language skills and
maintenance. 51 They must also receive sponsorship from an employer in the UK.
Further to this there is also a shortage occupation list, which is published for the UK, with an
additional list for Scotland. The list is compiled by the Migration Advisory Committee
(MAC), which is a non-departmental public body comprised of economists and migration
experts who give migration advise to the UK Government.52
The shortage occupation list is important for employers and employees because priority is
given to those migrants coming through the list who then make up the 20,700 and also
because if the job is on the list then there is no need to advertise the vacancy in the resident
labour market.53
The list is compiled by data analysis from the economists at the MAC but also through
consultation with employers in the UK. Public events are also held. In the most recent in
2012 two public general information events were held in London along with further events in
Glasgow, Belfast and Nottingham i.e. events were held in England, Scotland and Northern
Ireland but none were held in Wales.
A consultation and call for evidence also took place with 70 organisations. The MAC met
with many organisations based in Scotland, including public bodies such as Scottish Ballet,
Scottish Enterprise, the Scottish Government and Scottish Opera. They do not, however,
appear to have met anyone from Wales. In fact, the Welsh Government’s response to the call
for evidence seems to be the only official interaction that anyone in Wales had with the entire
process.54
23

The outcome is that there is now a list for the UK and an additional list for Scotland which
has extra shortages in areas such as health. For those choosing to fill these occupations the
job must be based in Scotland.55 The immigration regime at present, therefore, appears to
side-line the immigration needs of Wales - that is to say Wales gets almost no consideration
when developing policy.
This is highly unfortunate. In the UK Commission’s Employer Skills Survey in 2011 8,500
vacancies were reported as hard-to-fill, equating to a third of all vacancies in the survey. Of
these 5,700 were deemed hard to fill because of the difficulty in finding candidates with the
required skills qualifications and experience, which equates to a fifth of all the vacancies in
the survey. The survey found that:
It is amongst Associate Professional and Machine Operative roles where employers
experience the greatest difficulties in meeting their demand for skills from the available
labour market. Skill shortage vacancies were most common among establishments in the
Manufacturing and Electricity, Gas and Water sectors, and most prevalent (i.e. made up the
highest proportion of all vacancies) in the Business Services sector.56

The survey goes on to conclude that the overall proportion of establishments experiencing
skill shortages and hard-to-fill vacancies was similar to the UK but that the total proportion
of vacancies classed as hard-to-fill or with a skill shortage was higher in Wales. This
suggests that in 2011 the problem of hard-to-fill vacancies and skill shortages was ‘more
acute in Wales’.57 This did not, however, result in Wales having any ability to target migrants
with the needed skills to relocated to Wales.
In the last survey of 2013 the percentage of establishments in Wales with a Skill-Shortage
Vacancy (SSV) increased from 3 to 4%, whilst the percentage of vacancies which are SSVs
increased from 18 to 20%. 58 Scotland and England have now moved ahead of Wales in
having the highest percentage of vacancies which are hard to fill due to a lack of skills,
qualification or experience in applicants for the role59. Although in Wales, when looking
specifically at skills, 35% of the skills gap results from an inability to recruit appropriately
skilled individuals. This is by far the highest in the UK and significantly higher than the UK
average of 26%.60 This is partly attributable to Welsh employers being the least likely to have
engaged in any training for their staff in the twelve months leading up to the survey of any of
the UK nations.61
Hence, Wales’s need for people to fill vacancies and provide skills is increasing, whilst Wales
has the highest proportion of Skill-Shortage Vacancies resulting from an inability to recruit
appropriately skilled individuals. And yet Wales’s input into the process for targeting
economic migrants seems to be the least of any area of the UK. Clearly, therefore, Wales
must begin having a much greater voice in the MAC’s process for determining migration,
with a view to establishing a shortage occupation list for Wales also, along with significantly
more emphasis being placed on Welsh employers to train and upskill their staff.

Tier 4: Studying in the UK
Tier 4 is for those people outside the European Economic Area who want to study in the UK.
Again there are various sub-headings depending on age group etc. But Tier 4 General is the
principal method for students entering the UK, which includes study for language courses.
This category has received much attention lately, especially in Wales, and appears to be the
focus for the UK Government’s efforts to reduce net migration to the UK. If we look to the
24

figures up to September 2012 then we see that overall visas issued for study (excluding
student visitors) fell by 26% from 284,649 to 210,921.62 Most of this fall related to nationals
of the Indian subcontinent, with the following decreases evident:





Pakistan, fall of 24,668 (-69%)
India, fall of 17,604 (-50%)
Sri Lanka, fall of 3,537 (-72%)
Bangladesh, fall of 3,402 (-53%)

For the year ending September 2013 study visas had increased slightly by 3% compared to
the previous year, although again there were significant drops in visas granted for study to
students from Pakistan (-60%) and India (-24%).63
This drop may be explained by the number of institutions who have been either black-listed
or closed down by the Home Office in recent times for selling degrees and effectively existing
in order to offer visas. Unfortunately, the University of Wales was involved in this scandal
after a BBC Wales investigation found it was validating degrees from “partner” organisations
that had been bought or where cheating had taken place in order for “students” to then apply
for a post-study visa.64
The issue for Wales is that the UK Government appears to have thrown the baby out with the
bathwater by not only closing or blacklisting suspect educational institutions, which they
ought to do, but then abolishing all post-study work visas. This means that whereas prior to
April 2012 an international student who had completed their study had two years in which to
seek employment, without any recourse to public funds, they must now obtain an employer
sponsorship in order to stay.
The employer sponsorship itself is problematic, especially for SMEs, which make up 90% of
businesses in Wales. The cost to become a sponsor is currently £51565. Organisations must
also provide documentation to the Home Office and demonstrate that they have an adequate
Human Relations (HR) department to keep the Home Office updated about the migrant at
work, as well as receiving the Home Office for inspections to ensure the employer is meeting
their requirements. This is a considerable amount of work and expense for SMEs, who must
also demonstrate that the vacancy they wish to fill could not be filled by a UK/EU national.
For the students themselves the visa fees can also be large and are an extra expense to the
tens of thousands of pounds they will have already paid in course fees. Since students have
no recourse to public funds they will also have needed to demonstrate that they had
sufficient maintenance funds for the duration of their study.66 A further problem is that the
student’s visa will not end until four months after they have completed their study, if their
course lasted for more than 12 months. This means that for four months before moving to a
different immigration Tier they are unable to gain full-time employment, under the
stipulations of the Tier 4 Visa, nor are they able to have any recourse to public funds. This
means that supporting themselves for those four months could prove very challenging.
If they do manage to get the sponsor they must then move into either Tier 1 or Tier 2 and
meet the very high minimum income requirements. In sum, in order for a student to work in
the UK they must be accepted to a ‘highly trusted institution’ in the UK, prove that they have
sufficient maintenance funds for their course fees and the duration of their stay, work no
more than 20 hours per week or 10 for lower qualifications, obtain sponsorship from an
25

employer whilst studying or during the four months after completing their course where they
are not allowed to work, move to a different Tier and then move straight into a highly paid
job that meets the minimum income requirements that have been set. If they are unable to
do all of this they will not be allowed to stay in the UK, and for many this will mean moving
from the UK no more than four months after completing their course.
For a country like Wales, with low GVA and a low skills base, forcing highly educated
individuals to leave so soon after completing their study seems like a missed opportunity.
Currently only applicants with a highly trusted institution as a sponsor have the right to gain
a visa, with other institutions either meaning it is at the discretion of Home Office or
impossible to get a visa. It would seem, therefore, that so as long as the system for
accrediting institutions is robust, those individuals who wish to work after study pose no
problem for the UK. If they have not found a job after two years they must leave anyway and
during that time they have had no access to public funds.
It would, therefore, seem prudent for Wales if the Welsh Government, in partnership with
Home Office, was able to reintroduce post-work study visas for those who have studied in
Wales so long as those migrants find jobs based in Wales. This effectively was the precedent
set by the Fresh Talent67 scheme in Scotland before the recent changes, which could have
been and still could be highly beneficial for the economy of Wales.

Tier 5: Temporary workers
Tier 5 covers temporary workers coming to the UK. These include:







Creative and sporting
Charity workers
Religious workers
Government authorised exchange
International agreement
Youth mobility scheme

Under the Youth Mobility Scheme participating territories and the number of sponsorships
allocated to them are as follows:
Australia - 35,000 places
Canada - 5,500 places
Japan - 1,000 places
Monaco - 1,000 places
New Zealand - 10,000 places
Republic of Korea - 1,000 places (certificates of sponsorship)
Taiwan - 1,000 places (certificates of sponsorship)68
Again, this Tier does not seem to take account of any special links that Wales has with the
rest of the world. It could be argued, for example, that sponsorships should be allocated to
the areas of Patagonia with a strong historical connection to Wales, which would mean
Argentina becoming a participating country, or areas of the United States, such as
Pennsylvania, which again have strong Welsh connections.

26

Family reunification
Another area where considerable change has taken place is with family reunification. On the
9th of July 2012 new rules came into force meaning a minimum income of £18,600 is now
needed in order for a British citizen to sponsor a non-EEA spouse or partner to move to the
UK. This rises to £22,400 to add a child to the application and then a further £2,400 for
each additional child included in the application.69 These new rules now mean that the UK
has the second highest income requirement for sponsors of any Western country other than
Norway.70
These new rules have a very human cost because less than half of the population in the UK
would be able to meet the requirements, and in Wales, with its lower than average salaries
even less proportionately would be able to meet the requirements. The new rules are already
keeping families apart and have even resulted in a number of British children, including
babies, being separated from their non-EEA parent because they were unable to enter the
UK.71
As a result a family migration inquiry was launched by the All-Party Parliamentary Group on
Migration in November 2012 to explore the impacts of the new rules.72 The key outcome of
this inquiry was a recommendation that the UK Government should commission an
independent review of the minimum income requirement.73 The new minimum threshold
does seem arbitrary, especially when considering that the national minimum wage only
amounts to £12,800 per year.

A federal system
Many federal states have adopted federal immigration systems. Australia and the United
States are examples. But one area stands out as being particularly useful as a model for
Wales and that is Quebec in Canada.
Quebec is distinctive in Canada, with a its own language (French) and its own cultural
traditions. Quebec’s desire to maintain its distinctiveness led to the Canada-Quebec Accord
being signed in 1991.
The Accord states that it is:
‘the wish of the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec … to provide Quebec
with new means to preserve its demographic importance in Canada, and to ensure the
integration of immigrants in Quebec in a manner that respects the distinct identity of
Quebec’.74

The Accord also stresses the importance of taking into account Canada’s ‘federal and
bilingual character’.75
Under the Accord the federal government in Canada still maintains overall control of
immigration, with responsibility to set its own standards, set the overall level of
immigration and also control over citizenship. The federal government has overall
responsibility for upholding Canada’s international commitments with regards to
immigration, including asylum.76

27

However, the Accord established that Quebec has ‘the sole responsibility for the selection of
immigrants destined to that province [Quebec] and Canada has the sole responsibility for the
admission of immigrants into that province’.77
This means that Canada controls the borders but that Quebec controls who is able to settle in
Quebec based on its own selection criteria, including specific requirements such as French
language skills.78
Canada also agrees to ‘admit any immigrant destined to Quebec who meets Quebec’s
selection criteria, if the immigrant is not in an inadmissible class under the law of Canada’.79
The number of migrants that Quebec receives is determined by Canada publishing annually
the total number of immigrants it expects for Canada as a whole, taking into consideration
Quebec’s advice on the number of immigrants it would like to receive. Quebec is then
allowed to receive a number of immigrants that represents its percentage of the Canadian
population out of the total number of migrants Canada wishes for that year, with the right to
exceed this figure by 5% for demographic reasons.80 As a result Quebec must then accept at
least the same percentage of the refugees that Canada has given protection to.
Hence, with Quebec 23.1% of the population of Canada in 2011, if the Canadian Government
declared it wanted 100,000 new official immigrants in 2014, Quebec could issue visas for up
to 28,100 migrants i.e. 23.1% + 5% = 28.1% of 100,000, which equals 28,100. Having now
issued visas that would make up 28.1% of the overall Canada total, Quebec must now accept
28.1% of the refugees that Citizenship and Immigration Canada accept in total for Canada.
Nonetheless, the refugees who are accepted will still not be admitted to Quebec by the
Canadian authorities unless they meet Quebec’s selection criteria. 81 This explains why
Quebec receives such a high proportion of refugees from the Francophone world. To
facilitate in this, along with the granting of visas to workers and students, Quebec officials
are granted presence in Canadian missions, which Quebec leases from Canada.82
Canadian authorities also require consent from the authorities in Quebec to admit a foreign
student or temporary foreign worker into Quebec.
Furthermore, Canada boasts a Provincial Nominee scheme, which means that all provinces
are able to nominate specific individuals that they would like to see emigrate to their
province. The system works by allowing foreign workers to apply to immigration services in
specific provinces and employers in those provinces informing the immigration services that
they have a position they cannot fill, with a profile and list of skills they need from an
employer. The immigration services of the province will then attempt to match the vacant
position with an applicant with the necessary skills, who also meets the cultural criteria. If
such a match is made the province will nominate that person to Canadian Immigration and,
so long as they meet Canada’s requirements also, they will be admitted. This system also
means that provinces in Canada are effectively able to headhunt high-value migrants that
they would like to see working in their provinces.
Finally, it is the responsibility of Quebec, not Canada to integrate migrants into Quebec. This
includes:


Ensuring the reception of all permanent residents and to provide them with a
referral service in order to refer them to the government services most appropriate to
their needs;
28







To counsel permanent residents in order to facilitate and accelerate their adaptation
and integration to Quebec society;
To assist permanent residents in determining their initial place of settlement in
Quebec;
To assist permanent residents to integrate into the Quebec labour market
To provide permanent residents with the means to learn the French language and to
become familiar with the principal characteristics of Quebec society;
To provide permanent residents in need with temporary financial assistance.83

Quebec is paid compensation by the Federal Government for providing these services in
Quebec.84

A system for Wales
With the precedent of Quebec in Canada it is not difficult to imagine how a federal
immigration system could work for Wales. If Wales and the UK were to sign a similar accord
then it could function something like this:
The UK Government would set its overall targets for immigration each year, which it
currently does not do. Instead it has only a vague ambition to bring net migration down to
the tens of thousands, with some targets such as we’ve seen for Tier 2 General, which is
currently 20,700. Wales would then be able to issue up to 10% of this number i.e. Wales as
5% of the population of the UK plus 5% for demographic reasons e.g. the population of Wales
dropping or the population of the UK significantly growing by comparison. The Welsh
Government then informs the UK Government of how many migrants it would like to issue
visas to. Let’s imagine in this instance they choose 5% of the UK total and that the UK
Government’s immigration target is 100,000. This would mean Wales being able to issue up
to 5,000 visas. It would then be up to the Welsh Government to select the candidates based
on their selection criteria and the Home Office would then grant access to those individuals.
As a result Wales would be required to take 5% of the refugees granted protection that year
in the UK. It would also then be Wales’s sole responsibility to integrate new migrants into
Wales (this is already the case for asylum seekers/refugees).
Furthermore, the Welsh Government will be able to nominate candidates for migration to
Wales. It will do this by allowing employers to approach them with hard to fill vacancies and
then matching those vacancies with outside applicants. Where there are no candidates who
have the necessary skills they will actively headhunt with the employer to try to find a
candidate. These candidates would take precedent over other candidates applying through
general categories.
This system would at all times operate in partnership with the Home Office. And where a
person was found to be in contravention of the agreements signed with the Welsh
Government, including being resident elsewhere in the UK, they will be deported.
The system itself would initially be funded through the Barnett Formula as immigration
would largely be a devolved competence.
Through this system Wales would control migration from outside the EEA into Wales,
meaning international migration would be based on our needs.

29

Extending Welsh culture
One of the most commendable aspects of the system in Quebec is that it ensures that the
cultural and linguistic integrity of Quebec is maintained, whilst Quebec is still within English
speaking Canada. It achieves this through selecting migrants from francophone countries
and also through its integration programme.
Unlike French, Welsh is not a global language with a ready supply of speakers looking to
migrate. Emphasis must, therefore, be put on integration and education. It is already
possible to take the oath of allegiance in Welsh when becoming a British citizen. However,
this is the extent of the Welsh language and Welsh culture’s role in the process.
Some scholarships have been made available to migrants/ethnic minorities who want to
learn Welsh, such as the Welsh Your Way scholarship. 85 However, in a more federal
immigration system it would become significantly easier to integrate new migrants into
Welsh culture, Welsh civic life and the Welsh language, because this would be the full
responsibility of the Welsh authorities.
At present in order to become a British citizen applicants must demonstrate a certain level of
English competence and must pass a British citizenship test, which puts emphasis on the UK
state institutions and “British” history. Given that both Welsh and English are official
languages in Wales it is important that opportunities should be provided to learn both
languages, particularly where Welsh is the community language.
For this reason it will be necessary to develop a Welsh for Speakers of Other Languages
(WSOL) programme to either run alongside, or be integrated into, the current English for
Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) programme.
The ESOL programme is currently integrated with citizenship classes and this too could take
place for a WSOL programme, with participants learning about the civic, democratic and
cultural life of Wales.
Organisations such as NIACE Dysgu Cymru should be involved because of their focus on
participants who have benefited the least from education and training, along with the
research they have already facilitated with ESOL and marginalised groups and individuals.
The British Council, with its focus on cultural relations and education opportunities can
further play a role in developing WSOL programmes.
Research also shows that learners in ESOL programmes ‘are keen to take part in learning
that is community based’.86 Stronger cooperation with Mentrau Iaith and Welsh for Adults
centres could be the forums through which this could happen. The context through which
this cooperation takes place could change depending on location. So for example, Mentrau in
rural areas with immigration largely from the UK can adapt their community learning to
reflect that; whilst Menter Caerdydd, with significant immigration from outside the UK can
adapt its community programme to reflect these circumstances.
It is important that new migrants understand the differing democratic systems; especially
with regards to information on health and education that make up part of ESOL courses,
because these areas are full competences of the Welsh Government.
Ultimately, if a person migrates to Wales and later becomes a citizen then they must develop
a good understanding of our democratic life, our civic life and our culture. If not then the
30

system is failing. At present the citizenship and integration programmes on offer do not
provide new migrants with such an understanding.

Bulgaria and Romania
As of the 1st of January 2014 the temporary restrictions imposed by the UK on Bulgarian and
Romanian nationals were lifted. The previous restrictions meant that:
Bulgarians and Romanians gained the right to visa-free travel to the UK in 2007,
when their countries joined the EU. But there were temporary restrictions on the
kind of jobs they could take. Employers had to apply for work permits and
migrants for an "accession worker card". Low-skilled workers were restricted to
existing quota schemes in the agricultural and food processing sectors. These
restrictions will be dropped on 1 January. Bulgarians and Romanians will also be
entitled to claim the same benefits and NHS care as other EU citizens.87

Furthermore, when considering what benefits Bulgarians and Romanians are entitled to the
following should be considered:
People coming to the UK from the European Economic Area - the EU member
states and Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway - do not have unrestricted access to
UK social security benefits and tax credits. Most will have to pass the habitual
residence test before they can claim. To pass, you must have a "right to reside" in
the UK, which means you are economically active, or are able to support yourself,
and you must be intending to settle here for the time being - in other words, be
"habitually resident". The test applies to British citizens returning to the UK after
time abroad, as well as people coming to the UK from other countries. If you pass
the test, you can claim housing benefit, council tax benefit, access to local
authority housing, income support, jobseeker's allowance and employment and
support allowance.88

There are many reasons to believe that the same level of immigration that took place when
restrictions were lifted in 2004 will not happen this time. The first is that Bulgarians and
Romanians have been free to travel to the UK since 2007, they just haven’t had the same
entitlements to public services and the job market as other EU nationals. Nonetheless, many
Bulgarians and Romanians have already relocated to the UK under various schemes meaning
that in July 2012 there 94,000 people who were born in Romania and 47,000 people born in
Bulgaria who were already resident in the UK.89 Hence, those who were very interested in
moving to the UK may have already done so. Although this will not become clear for several
more years.
The second reason is that in 2004 only the UK, Ireland and Sweden chose not to include
restrictions on the A8 eastern European countries. The Labour Government in the UK
wrongly predicted that only 15,000 people a year would move to the UK from these
countries. But the UK’s economy is considerably larger than Sweden’s or Ireland’s and so in
the event it was 300,000 people a year who moved to the UK.90 Furthermore, ‘there is clear
evidence that the pattern of transitional restrictions in place at the beginning of the
2004 enlargement diverted mobile workers away from traditional destinations – namely
Germany – and towards the more easily accessed labour markets in the UK and Ireland.’91
This time all countries that have imposed restrictions will lift them at the same time,
meaning the UK will not be the only large economy to do so. In addition to this the combined
31

populations of the accession countries in 2004 was 70 million, whereas the combined
population of Romania and Bulgaria is 29 million. This means that there are considerably
fewer people than in 2004, with more countries available for them to move to.
The final reason to think that immigration from Romania and Bulgaria may be much lower is
because polling of Romanians and Bulgarians suggests that there are other places in the EU
to which they would much prefer to move. Somewhat amazingly the UK Government has
even considered an advertising campaign in Romania and Bulgaria focusing on the negative
aspects of life in the UK in order to dissuade Romanians and Bulgarians from moving here.92
But recent polling by Newsnight of more than 1000 people in each country suggests these
may be unnecessary because when asked to pick their first choice of EU country to move to:
just 4.6 per cent of Romanians and 9.3 per cent of Bulgarians chose the UK. When
asked specifically whether they would consider the UK as a destination, these
numbers rose to 8.2 per cent for Romanians and 13.6 per cent for Bulgarians. But
questioned on whether they have made concrete plans to move to UK, such as
searching for accommodation and employment, these figures fall significantly.
Just 1.2 per cent of Bulgarians and 0.4 of Romanians have begun to look for
accommodation and only four per cent of Bulgarians and one per cent of
Romanians have started to look for work either with a recruitment agency or
independently. In addition, of those looking for work, 65 per cent of Romanians
and 60 per cent of Bulgarians said they would only migrate to the UK with a firm
offer of employment.93

The hysteria over Romanians and Bulgarians moving to the UK, therefore, seems over the
top.

Changes included in the Queen’s Speech
As a result of the anxiety that was generated from the imminent removal of restrictions on
Bulgarians and Romanians a number of new immigration measures were announced in the
Queen’s speech.
The measures included:









landlords will be forced to check immigration status
illegal migrants will not get driving licences
foreign criminals will be deported more easily, as well as people who are in the UK
illegally.
Businesses caught employing illegal foreign labour would face bigger fines.
Migrants' access to the NHS would be restricted and temporary visitors would have to
"make a contribution" to the cost of their care, either with their own money or
through their government.
Not being allowed to claim jobseeker's allowance for the first six months
Tightening a two- to five-year residency requirement for access to social housing.

The limits of immigration policy
EU membership means that we cannot prevent European migration. Bulgarian, Romanian,
Polish, French and German people all have the right to live in Wales, just as we have the
right to live in their countries.
32

Immigration is largely a result of economic incentives and pressures. The most effective way
to limit migration from the EU is to support a strong redistributive policy .
As Wales becomes an economic success story we will attract greater numbers of international
migrants, which is why we need to put in place now a system that will enable us to attract the
people that we need to help us build a successful nation.

33

References

1Colford,

P. (04 Apr 2013), ‘Illegal migrant’ no more,
http://blog.ap.org/2013/04/02/illegal-immigrant-no-more/
2 Pearce, D. (20 Jan 2013), You’re a soft touch,
http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/4753651/lithuanian-immigrant-youre-a-softtouch.html
3 Walters, S. (accessed 09 Apr 2013), Secret report warns of migration meltdown in Britain,
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-398232/Secret-report-warns-migration-meltdownBritain.html
4 ONS (30 Aug 2012), Population by country of birth and nationality report, August 2012,
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171776_277619.pdf
5ONS, Population by country of birth and nationality report, August 2012, p.10.
6 ONS, Population by country of birth and nationality report, August 2012, p.9.
7ONS (16May 2013), Detailed country of birth and nationality analysis from the 2011 Census of
England and Wales, http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171776_310441.pdf
8Rogers, S. (26 May 2011), The UK’s top foreign born population: see where people live and where
they’re from, http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2011/may/26/foreign-born-ukpopulation#
9 ONS (11 Dec 2012), 2011 Census: Key statistics for Wales, March2011, p.8
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171778_290982.pdf
10 ONS, 2011 Census: key statistics for Wales, p.9
11ONS, 2011 Census: key statistics for Wales, p.6
12 Your Cardiff (11 Dec 2012), Cardiff 2011 Census data mapped,
http://yourcardiff.mediawales-1.titaninternet.co.uk/2012/12/11/cardiff-2011-census-data-mapped/
13 ONS, 2011 Census: key statistics for Wales, p.9
14 Stats Wales (accessed 10 Sep 2013), Migration between Wales and the rest of the UK by local
authority, flow and period of change, https://statswales.wales.gov.uk/Catalogue/Population-andMigration/Migration/Internal/MigrationBetweenWalesAndTheRestOfTheUK-by-LocalAuthorityFlow-PeriodOfChange&
Stats Wales (accessed 10 Sep 2013), Migration flows, in thousands, of people between Wales and the
rest of the World (non-UK) by flow and year, https://statswales.wales.gov.uk/Catalogue/PopulationandMigration/Migration/International/MigrationFlowsOfPeopleBetweenWalesAndTheRestOfTheWorld
Non-UK-by-Flow-Year
15 Rogers, The UK’s top foreign born population,
http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2011/may/26/foreign-born-uk-population#
16 ONS, 2011 Census: key statistics for Wales, p.10&
Eurostat ((11 Jul 2012), Foreign citizens and foreign-born population,
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_STAT-12-105_en.htm
17 ONS (30 Aug 2012), Births in England and Wales by parents’ country of birth, 2011, p.2
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171778_276702.pdf
18 ONS, Births in England and Wales by parents’ country of birth , p.7.
19 ONS, Births in England and Wales by parents’ country of birth , p.3.
20 Welsh Refugee Council (accessed 15 Apr 2013), Asylum in Wales,
http://welshrefugeecouncil.org.uk/asylum-in-wales-and-wrc/
21 UNHCR (accessed 15 Apr 2013), Convention and protocol relating to the status of refugees, p.14,
http://www.unhcr.org/3b66c2aa10.html
22 Welsh Refugee Council, Asylum in Wales.
23 The Guardian (19 Jan 2009), Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
2006,http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/15/immigrationasylum-nationality-act
24 Home Office (23 May 2013), Tables for ‘immigration statistics, January to March 2013’,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/tables-for-immigration-statistics-january-to-march2013
25 ONS (08 Aug 2013), Annual mid-year population estimates, 2011 and 2012,
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171778_320900.pdf

34

26Crawley,

H. (Jul 2013), Asylum seekers and refugees in Wales,
http://www.wmp.org.uk/documents/wsmp/News%20and%20Events/Migration%20Briefings/Asylu
m%20Seekers%20and%20Refugees%20in%20Wales.pdf
27 ICAR (updated 06 Oct 2009), Current situation: refugees,
http://www.icar.org.uk/11670/cardiff/current-situation.html
28 Home Office (29 Nov 2012), Immigration statistics, July to September 2012,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/immigration-statistics-july-to-september2012/immigration-statistics-july-to-september-2012
29 The Telegraph (19 Dec 2012), Afghans who served Britain ‘should be allowed to settle like Iraqi
interpreters’, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/defence/9754924/Afghans-who-servedBritain-should-be-allowed-to-settle-like-Iraqi-interpreters.html
30 Mail Online (accessed 19 Apr 2013), Britain ‘swamped by asylum-seekers’,
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-177816/Britain-swamped-asylum-seekers.html
31 The Migration Observatory (accessed 22 Apr 2013), Thinking behind the number: understanding
public opinion on immigration in Britain,
http://migrationobservatory.ox.ac.uk/understanding-uk-public-opinion/executive-summary
32 Home Office, Immigration statistics, July to September 2012
33 Home Office, Immigration statistics, July to September 2012
34 Home Office, Immigration statistics, July to September 2012
35 Eurostat (19 Jun 2012), Asylum decisions in the EU27, p.4,
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_PUBLIC/3-19062012-BP/EN/3-19062012-BP-EN.PDF
36 Eurostat, Asylum applicants and first instance decisions on asylum applications: 2012, p.11,
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_OFFPUB/KS-QA-13-005/EN/KS-QA-13-005-EN.PDF
37 Eurostat, Asylum decisions in the EU27, p.1.
38 ICAR, Current situation: refugees
39 Welsh Government (Jun 2008), Refugee inclusion strategy,
http://wales.gov.uk/dsjlg/publications/communityregendevelop/refugeeinclusionstrategy/strategye.
pdf;jsessionid=ED7B41BDBE850B70801D497230BE975B?lang=en
40 Welsh Government (Sep 2009), Refugees living in Wales: A survey of skills, experience, and
barriers to inclusion, p. 4
http://wales.gov.uk/docs/dsjlg/publications/equality/091113refugeeexecsumen.pdf
41 Welsh Government, Refugees living in Wales, pp. 8-9
42 Whitehead, T. (09 Feb 2010), Labour’s ‘secret plan’ to lure migrants,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/immigration/7198329/Labours-secret-plan-to-luremigrants.html
43Whitehead, Labour’s ‘secret plan’ to lure migrants.
44 Blinder, S. (23 Feb 2012), UK public opinion towards immigration: overall attitudes and level of
concern, pp. 5-6. http://www.migrationobservatory.ox.ac.uk/sites/files/migobs/Public%20OpinionOverall%20Attitudes%20and%20Level%20of%20Concern.pdf
45 UKBA (accessed 20 May 2013), High-value migrants,
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/visas-immigration/working/tier1/
46 UKBA (accessed 20 May 2013), Tier 1 (graduate entrepreneur),
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/visas-immigration/working/tier1/graduate-entrepreneur/
47 UKBA (Apr 2013), Tier 1 (entrepreneur) of the points based system – policy guidance, p.8,
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/applicationforms/pbs/tier1entrepreneurguidance1.p
df
48 UKBA (accessed 20 May 2013), Tier 1 (investor),
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/visas-immigration/working/tier1/investor/
49 UKBA (accessed 20 May 2013), Tier 2 (general),
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/visas-immigration/working/tier2/general/
50UKBA, Tier 2(general).
51 UKBA (Apr 2013), Tier 2 of the policy based system – policy guidance,
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/applicationforms/pbs/tier2-guidance.pdf
52 Migration Advisory Committee (Feb 2013), Skilled shortage sensible, p.3
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/documents/aboutus/workingwithus/mac/34macsixth-review/mac-report?view=Binary
53Migration Advisory Committee, Skilled shortage sensible, P.1.
54 Migration Advisory Committee, Skilled shortage sensible ,pp.223-229.

35

UKBA (06 Apr 2013), Tier 2 shortage occupation list – government approved version, p.1
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/documents/workingintheuk/shortageoccupationlist
nov11.pdf
56 UKCES (Nov 2012), UK Commission’s employer skills survey 2011: Wales results, p.2
http://www.ukces.org.uk/assets/ukces/docs/publications/evidence-report-62-executivesummary.pdf
57 UKCES, UK Commission’s employer skills survey 2011: Wales results, p.2
58 UKCES (Jan 2014), UK Commission’s employer skills survey 2013: UK results, p.27
http://www.ukces.org.uk/assets/ukces/docs/publications/evidence-report-81-ukces-employer-skillssurvey-13-full-report.pdf
59 UKCES, UK Commission’s employer skills survey 2013: UK results, p.28
60 UKCES, UK Commission’s employer skills survey 2013: UK results, p.43
61 UKCES, UK Commission’s employer skills survey 2013: UK results, p.13
62 Home Office (03 Oct 2013), Immigration statistics, July to September 2012,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/immigration-statistics-july-to-september2012/immigration-statistics-july-to-september-2012#study-1
63 Home Office (28 Nov 2013), Immigration statistics, July to September 2013,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/immigration-statistics-july-to-september2013/immigration-statistics-july-to-september-2013
64 Jenkins, C. (05 Oct 2011), University of Wales degree and visa scam exposed by the BBC,
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-15171830
65 UKBA (accessed 20 May 2013), Fees for our services,
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/aboutus/fees/
66 UKBA (Apr 2013), Tier 4 of the points based system – policy guidance, p.2
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/applicationforms/pbs/Tier4migrantguidance.pdf
67 UKBA (accessed 21 May 2013), Fresh talent: working in Scotland,
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/visas-immigration/working/tier1/freshtalent/
68 UKBA (accessed 21 May 2013), Tier 5: youth mobility scheme,
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/visas-immigration/working/tier5/youthmobilityscheme/
69 All-Party Parliamentary Group on Migration (Jun 2013), Report of the inquiry into new family
migration rules, p.6
http://www.appgmigration.org.uk/sites/default/files/APPG_family_migration_inquiry_report-Jun2013.pdf
70 Huddleston, T. (06 Jul 2012), ‘Can’t buy me love’,
http://www.mipex.eu/blog/cant-buy-me-love
71 White, RG. (10 Jun 2013), How the government’s immigration rules are tearing families apart,
http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/06/how-governments-immigration-rules-are-tearingfamilies-apart
72All-Party Parliamentary Group on Migration (Jun 2013), Report of the inquiry into new family
migration rules, p.6.
73All-Party Parliamentary Group on Migration (Jun 2013), Report of the inquiry into new family
migration rules, p.8.
74Gouvernement du Québec (Mar 2000), Canada-Québec accord relating to immigration and
temporary admission of aliens, p.1
http://www.micc.gouv.qc.ca/publications/pdf/Accord_canada_quebec_immigration_anglais.pdf
75Gouvernement du Québec , Canada-Québec accord, p.1
76Gouvernement du Québec , Canada-Québec accord, p.2
77Gouvernement du Québec , Canada-Québec accord, p.3
78Gouvernement du Québec (accessed 27 May 2013), Requirements of the immigration program for
skilled workers, http://www.immigration-quebec.gouv.qc.ca/en/immigrate-settle/permanentworkers/official-immigration-application/requirements-programs/index.html
79Gouvernement du Québec , Canada-Québec accord, p.3
80Gouvernement du Québec , Canada-Québec accord, p.2
81Gouvernement du Québec , Canada-Québec accord, p.4
82Gouvernement du Québec , Canada-Québec accord, p.C-2
83Gouvernement du Québec , Canada-Québec accord, p.A-7
84Gouvernement du Québec , Canada-Québec accord, p.B-2
85 Welsh for Adults (accessed 27 May 2013), Welsh your way scholarship,
http://schools.caerdydd.ac.uk/learnwelsh/resources/WelshyourWayscholarship.pdf
55

36

Furlong, C. & J. Hunt (Mar 2009), ESOL in Wales: learning from the voluntary sector,
http://esol.britishcouncil.org/sites/esol/files/ESOL%20in%20Wales%20%20Learning%20from%20the%20Voluntary%20Sector.pdf
87 BBC (05 Apr 2013), Q&A: Bulgarian and Romanian immigration,
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-21523319
88 BBC, Q&A: Bulgarian and Romanian immigration
89 BBC, Q&A: Bulgarian and Romanian immigration
90 Eaton, G. (22 Apr 2013), How fears over Romanian and Bulgarian immigration have been
exaggerated, http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/04/how-fears-over-romanian-andbulgarian-immigration-have-been-exaggerated
91Holland, D. et al. (Jul 2011), Labour mobility within the EU – the impact of enlargement and the
functioning of the transitional arrangements,
p.3.http://ec.europa.eu/social/BlobServlet?docId=7193&langId=en
92Syal, R. (27 Jan 2013), Immigration: Romanian or Bulgarian? You won’t like it here,
http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2013/jan/27/uk-immigration-romania-bulgaria-ministers
93 Eaton, How fears over Romanian and Bulgarian immigration have been exaggerated
86

37

