Pre-Manifesto 2014
A Stronger Economy
and a Fairer Society
Enabling every person
to get on in life

4

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

Contents

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

Introduction by Nick Clegg

8

Record of Delivery – Promise of More

10

Finances:
1     Responsible
    Balancing the budget

12

    Shared Prosperity:

16

Green Britain Guarantee:
Five green laws    

26

    Family Finances:

28

    An Opportunity Society:
    World class education for all

38

5     Health and wellbeing for all

     A Better Place to Live:

46

6     Policing, justice and the border force

    Secure Communities:

54

    Power to the People: Freedom,

60

    Britain in the World: Global action for

70

2     Building a sustainable economy

3     Real help to get by and get on
4

7     Democracy and citizenship
8     security and prosperity

Note: this paper sets out Liberal Democrat policies and priorities for the United Kingdom.
The Scottish and Welsh Liberal Democrats set their own policy on devolved matters,
and for those policy areas, the proposals here apply to England only. Our sister party,
the Alliance Party of Northern Ireland, makes its own policy on devolved issues in
Northern Ireland.
Some of these policies imply a change to existing government tax and spending
plans; we will be publishing a more detailed costings assessment nearer to the time
of the general election.

5

Introduction

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

Dear friend,
This is a manifesto about the future: your future, your children’s future,
and Britain’s future.
Since 2010, Liberal Democrats have worked in government to rescue
and repair Britain’s shattered economy.
Growth is up. Jobs are up. Government borrowing is down. The
repairs to our public finances must be completed. And they must be
completed fairly. But I do not believe that in the next five years Britain
simply wants more of the same.
We need to move from rescue to renewal. We need to move from
austerity to ambition. We need to think boldly and restore a sense of
national optimism.
After the rescue from recession we cannot go back to the old Britain.
We no longer want an economy based on debt and speculation; out
of the rubble of the 2008 crash we must build a new economy, not just
reassemble the old one. We cannot accept a society of unfairness and
inequality of opportunity. We cannot mortgage our children’s future
by ignoring the threat of climate change; and we cannot have a state
where power is hoarded at the centre rather than being returned to
citizens and to our local areas.
I believe that the task of a liberal party is above all to empower every
person to realise their own potential. No matter what your background,
your race, your colour, your sex or your sexuality: we believe in you.
Liberal Democrats don’t write anybody off.
Our determination to set people free is the thread that holds this
whole manifesto together. The Liberal Democrat vision for the next five
years is to focus our efforts on clearing away the biggest barriers that
are holding people, and holding Britain, back. w

7

8

Introduction

So we will:
•	
•	

•	
•	
•	
•	

•	

Finish the job on the deficit fairly and balance the books so the
next generation aren't burdened by huge interest payments.
Rewire the economy to cut out carbon, rebuild our national
infrastructure, and embrace new technology, so the next
generation can be protected from the threat of runaway climate
change.
Rebalance the tax system away from taxing work and towards
unearned wealth, so the next generation can keep more of the
money they earn and live in a more equal world.
Build the homes our country needs to stop prices spiralling out of
reach, so the next generation have the chance to bring up a family
in a home of their own.
Return power from the stifling grip of Whitehall to the citizens and
communities of our nation, so the next generation have the power
to shape the society in which they live.
Restore confidence in Britain’s immigration system with fair rules
and competent administration, so the next generation can continue
to live in an open, tolerant society that benefits from people and
expertise from around the world.
And, above all, invest every penny we can in education from cradle
to college – nursery, school, apprenticeships and college – so all
our children get the chance to live out their full potential.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

Our objective is to create a stronger economy and a fairer society: a
society of free citizens in which every person is enabled to get on in
life.
I am incredibly proud of what the Liberal Democrats have achieved
in Government.
Think back to 2010: a country in turmoil, at sea on the financial
markets, with borrowing spiralling out of control and forecasters
predicting disaster as the first peacetime coalition in 80 years sought to
restore order after the financial crash.
We have come a long way. The economy rebuilt. Millions of people
freed from paying income tax. More renewable energy than ever. The
Pupil Premium to help poor children get a first-class education. More
childcare and shared parental leave. Cancelling ID cards. Free school
meals for under-7s. More apprentices. The biggest ever cash increase
in the state pension. A Green Investment Bank. Equal marriage. The
biggest transfer of fiscal power to Scotland in three hundred years.
None of these things would have happened without the Liberal
Democrats.
But this manifesto is about the future and not the past. Liberal
Democrats played an essential role in rescuing Britain; I am asking for
your support today so that we can lead the renewal.
I am asking you to back a liberal Britain where you and the people
you care about have the freedom, the space, and the opportunity to
flourish.

Nick Clegg

9

Finish the job of balancing the books, on time
and fairly.
Raise the personal allowance to at least
£12,500, cutting your taxes by an extra £400.
Finish the job of balancing the books, on time
and fairly.
Invest to make the UK a world leader in low
Raise the
personal
at least
carbon
cars,
energyallowance
efficiencytoand
hi-tech
£12,500, cuttingand
yourcontinue
taxes bythe
anRegional
extra £400.
manufacturing,
Growth Fund to back growing businesses.
Invest
make
the UK
a world
in low
Protecttoearly
years,
sixth
form leader
and college
carbon cars,
efficiency
hi-tech
budgets
too –energy
investment
from and
cradle
to
manufacturing,
continue the Regional
college
to raise and
standards.
Growth Fund to back growing businesses.
More free childcare: moving to 20 hours a
Protect
years,
sixth form
college
week
forearly
working
families
from and
the end
of paid
budgets too
– investment
from
to
maternity
leave
right through
tocradle
school.
college to raise standards.
Legislate to make the triple lock permanent,
More free childcare:
20 hours
guaranteeing
decentmoving
pensiontorises
everyayear.
week for working families from the end of paid
maternity leave right through to school.
Legislate to make the triple lock permanent,

Given an £800 tax cut to low and middle
income earners by letting you earn
Cut the deficit
by half, reducing borrowing by
£10,500
tax free.
the equivalent of £3,000 for every household.

Industrial Strategy and Business Bank to grow
Given anBritish
£800 tax
cut to lowand
anddelivered
middle
modern
businesses;
income jobs
earners
letting
you earn
£10,500 tax
99,000
withby
our
£3 billion
Regional
free.
Growth
Fund.

Industrial
and Business
Bank to grow
ProtectedStrategy
schools budgets
and introduced
modern
businesses;
and who might
the
pupilBritish
premium
to help children
500,000 jobs
otherwise
fall created
behind. or protected with our £3
billion Regional Growth Fund.

Increased free childcare to 15 hours a week
Protected
schools budgets
and introduced
for
3 and 4-year-olds,
and disadvantaged
the pupil premium to help children who might
2-year-olds.
otherwise fall behind.

Secured the biggest ever cash rise in the state
Increased
freeour
childcare
to 15policy
hourson
a week
for
pension
with
‘triple lock’
uprating.
3 and 4 year olds, and 40% of 2 year olds.

Secured the biggest ever cash rise in the state

A Promise of More

Cut the deficit by half, reducing borrowing by
the equivalent of £3,000 for every household.

A Record of Delivery

10
Record of Delivery – Promise of More

guaranteeing decent pension rises every year.
Cut energy bills and create jobs with a national
programme to insulate homes with a Council
Tax cut if you take part.
A discount bus pass for under-21s so they can
afford to travel to college or work.
Introduce a new ‘Carer’s Bonus’ so carers can
take a proper break every year.

Protect your privacy by updating data laws for
the internet age with a Digital Bill of Rights.

Bring back proper border checks so we know
who’s coming in and leaving the UK.

Reform party funding, electoral reform and an
elected House of Lords.

A new wave of devolution to the nations of the
UK and ‘Devolution on Demand’ to transfer
more power and control to local areas.

pension with our ‘triple lock’ policy on uprating.

Established the world’s first Green Investment
Bank, helping treble renewable electricity
generation.

Nearly 2 million new apprenticeships, training
our workforce for 21st century jobs.

Helped people balance work and family life
with shared parental leave and the right to
request flexible working for all.

Extended personal freedom by scrapping ID
cards and introducing equal marriage for gay
and lesbian couples.

Closed down bogus colleges and tightened up
English language tests for people moving to
Britain from overseas.

Fixed Term Parliaments, taking away the Prime
Minister’s power to call elections when it suits
the governing party.

New financial powers for Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland, City Deals and Growth
Deals to enable local people to drive local
economic growth.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014
11

12

????

1
Responsible finances:
Balancing the budget
Responsible finances underpin
every good government. High
debt and deficits are a risk to
economic stability and it is
simply not right to borrow
too much money and expect
our children to pay it back.
Debt interest payments are
now £53 billion a year: more
than we spend on schools.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

13

14

Responsible finances: Balancing the budget

A responsible approach to tackling the deficit and our country’s debts
is essential because it underpins everything else we want to achieve for
Britain. In the last five years, we have worked hard to bring balance back
to Britain's public finances after the financial crash. By 2015, the deficit
will be around half what it was in 2010. But there is still work to be done.
Only Liberal Democrats will complete the job on time in a way that is fair,
enables sustainable growth and protects public services.
Balancing the budget
We will complete the job of balancing the budget – on time, in full, and
fairly. The Liberal Democrat objective is to eradicate the structural current
budget deficit by 2017/18 and have debt falling as a percentage of GDP.
We will ensure further deficit reduction is achieved fairly, and not solely
by cutting public spending. For example we will introduce a banded High
Value Property Levy (the ‘Mansion Tax’) on homes worth over £2 million.
This decision helps enable us to continue to protect NHS spending,
extend the protection of schools’ budgets to include early years and 16-19
education, and ensure 0.7% of GNI is spent on international development
aid.
We will carry out a full Spending Review after the General Election.
Building on the successes of this Parliament, we will focus on delivering
efficiency, funding proven spend-to-save initiatives, pursue local and
community integration to drive efficiency, and invest in technology to get
public services and frontline staff online.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

Looking to the future
Once we have balanced the books, we will ensure that overall public
spending grows again in line with the economy. This will ensure we can
improve key public services and enable public sector workers to receive
fair and affordable increases in their pay. We understand that public
services depend upon high quality and dedicated staff.
  We will follow two new fiscal rules.
Our first fiscal rule is that, from 2017/18, debt must fall as a proportion of
our national income every year – except during a recession – so it reaches
sustainable levels around the middle of the next decade.
Our second fiscal rule is that over the economic cycle we will balance
the overall budget, with one significant exception to enable us to invest in
the things that will help our economy grow. Provided the debt rule is met,
the government will be able to borrow for capital spending that enhances
economic growth or financial stability.
In our spending review we will set out long-term plans for capital
expenditure, and ensure that investment in infrastructure, including
housing, continues to rise both in absolute terms and as a share of
the economy. u

Our plan to finish
the job and balance
the books
u Aim to balance the structural current budget by 2017/18.
u Set a course to reduce debt as a share of national income.
u Make deficit reduction fair by ensuring high earners and the
wealthiest pay their share.
u Set new fiscal rules to balance the budget while allowing
borrowing for productive investment.
u Increase public spending again in line with growth in the
economy once the budget is balanced.

15

16

????

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

2
Shared prosperity:
Building a Sustainable
Economy
Liberal Democrats want an
economy that is strong, green,
open and fair. As Britain
recovers, we must make sure we
don’t return to growth based on
personal debt, speculation and
low skills.

17

18

Shared prosperity: Building a sustainable economy

Our economic plan is all about building prosperity that lasts for
everyone. We will ensure the recovery is balanced and sustainable –
built on strong national infrastructure, a stable, competitive business
environment and investment in skills, green technologies and
innovation. We will ensure the recovery has roots in every part of the
UK.
We’ve made a big start in government: reforming the banking
system; enabling unprecedented investment in low carbon energy; a
Regional Growth Fund and a bold new Industrial Strategy to create
sustainable growth and high skilled jobs; nearly two million new
apprenticeships; transparency of company ownership and more
diversity in business leadership.
Now is the time to push forward with our ambitious plans, and reject
attempts by establishment forces simply to rebuild the old economy.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

A Record of Delivery

Industrial Strategy, Green
Investment Bank and Business
Bank to grow modern British
businesses.
Biggest rail investment since
Victorian times.

A Promise of More

Invest to make the UK a world
leader in low carbon cars,
energy efficiency and hi-tech
manufacturing.
Continue High Speed Rail and
Crossrail 2, electrify main lines
and re-open local stations to
enable more people to travel by
train.

Trebled renewable energy
generation.

Legally-binding decarbonisation
target to green our electricity
and action to boost renewable
heating.

Delivered 99,00 jobs with our
£3 billion Regional Growth Fund.

Continue Regional Growth Fund
to back growing businesses.

Introduced shared parental leave
and flexible working for all.

Encourage fathers to be more
involved by expanding shared
parental leave with a ‘use-itor-lose-it’ month for fathers to
encourage them to take time off
with young children.

Whether it’s fighting for proper investment in renewable energy, or
working to build a high-skill, flexible labour market: Liberal Democrats
will make sure Britain's economy doesn’t return to the mistakes of
the past.

2.1 Economic and industrial growth
Government must strengthen the foundations for growth: a highly skilled
workforce and flexible business support and finance. We must invest
in growing sectors like manufacturing that can provide high-skilled,
sustainable jobs, including opening up the supply chain to more small and
medium sized businesses.
Britain also needs a balanced economy rooted in every part of the UK. w

19

20

Shared prosperity: Building a sustainable economy

We will:
•	 Continue to develop our Industrial Strategy, working with key
sectors which are critical to Britain’s ability to trade internationally –
motor vehicles, aerospace, low-carbon energy, chemicals, creative
industries and more.
•	 Develop the skilled workforce needed to support this growth with
major expansion of high-quality and advanced apprenticeships,
offering vocational education on a par with academic qualifications
backed up with new sector-led National Colleges.
•	 Support innovation through greater public funding on a longer
timescale, with a ring-fenced science budget, more ‘Catapult’
innovation and technology centres and a green innovation arm within
the new Business Bank.
•	 Invest in major transport improvements and infrastructure to create
a ‘Northern Economic Corridor’; a focus for growth, innovation and
prosperity across northern England.
•	 Build on the success of the Regional Growth Fund which has already
delivered 99,000 jobs and £1.8 billion of private investment. We will
continue the Fund throughout the Parliament.
•	 Devolve more economic decision making to local areas and away
from national government.

2.2 Banking and financial reform
The financial crisis of 2008 caused real damage to our economy
including one of the largest budget deficits in the world and banks
unable to support the real economy. Liberal Democrats in Government
ensured radical reform of the banking industry – the separation of retail
and investment banking – to make banks safe and no longer dependent
on a taxpayer guarantee.

We will:
•	 Expand the British Business Bank so that it performs a more central
role in the economy, focusing on long-term capital for middle-sized
business.
•	 Facilitate new entrants to the banking sector, including through
public procurement policy, so that there is much more choice and
variety of competitors in banking, in particular business banking,
encourage the growth of crowd funding and alternative finance
models, and promote a new community banking sector to support
SMEs and social enterprises.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

•	 Develop the Business Growth Fund to make it work alongside the
British Business Bank to meet Britain’s shortage of equity capital for
growing firms.
•	 Grow the Green Investment Bank.

2.3 Creating a stable and competitive environment for
growth.
Britain needs a stable and competitive environment for growth; this is
essential to attract and sustain new businesses and new jobs. Britain
is not just a part of the European economy – we have to compete
with the developing economies of Asia and Latin America, which are
increasingly powering ahead.
We need to lock in macroeconomic stability, including low inflation,
and reduce the risks of a return to the economics of boom and bust.
And we need a tax system which is simple, fair and competitive – which
attracts and retains jobs in our country, while ensuring business makes
a fair contribution.

We will:
•	 Continue to support an independent Bank of England, with
a mandate to keep inflation low and stable, so as to support
sustainable growth. We will protect the new regulatory framework
which ensures that the Bank of England has the necessary tools to
help avoid a return to boom and bust.
•	 Continue to reform business tax to ensure it stays competitive,
making small and medium-sized enterprises the priority for any
business tax cuts. In particular, in England we will review business
rates, which are a disproportionate burden on smaller businesses.
The review will cover the option of moving to Site Value Rating within
five years, and in the longer term Land Value Taxation more broadly.
•	 Establish a new Regulation Advisory Board to reduce regulatory
uncertainty and remove unnecessary business regulation. We
understand that well-designed regulation has a vital role in creating
markets and driving investment and will use it, in particular, to
promote low-carbon and resource-efficient innovation.

2.4 Making the connection: transport and broadband
infrastructure
Liberal Democrats are leading the renewal of Britain’s ageing
infrastructure but we still have decades of under-investment to catch
up on. We need better transport infrastructure, faster broadband, a w

21

22

Shared prosperity: Building a sustainable economy

modern railway system, and less congestion on our roads.
We have established our second fiscal rule precisely so that we can
invest in essential productive infrastructure to enable the economy to
grow.

We will:
•	 Set out 10-year rolling capital investment plans.
•	 Develop a comprehensive plan to electrify all suburban and major
rail routes, reopen many smaller stations, restore twin track lines
to major routes and proceed with HS2, as the first stage of a highspeed rail network to Scotland.
•	 Support a new generation of light rail and ultra-light rail schemes in
towns and cities where local people want them.
•	 Complete the roll-out of high speed broadband, to reach over 99%
of the UK.
•	 Continue funding for local economic and sustainable transport
infrastructure through the Local Growth Fund.
•	 Ensure our airport infrastructure meets the needs of a modern
and open economy, without allowing emissions from aviation
to undermine our goal of a zero-carbon Britain by 2050. We will
carefully consider the conclusions of the Davies Review into runway
capacity and develop a strategic airports policy for the whole of
the UK in the light of those recommendations and advice from
the Committee on Climate Change. We remain opposed to any
expansion of Heathrow, Stansted or Gatwick and any new airport
in the Thames Estuary, because of local issues of air and noise
pollution. We will ensure no net increase in runways across the UK
as a whole by prohibiting the opening of any new runways unless
others are closed elsewhere.
•	 Support the expansion of smart card ticketing systems.
•	 Make progress towards implementing the recommendations of the
‘Get Britain Cycling’ report.

2.5 Low carbon energy
In the new economy, we need to use less energy, and get what energy
we use from low-carbon sources. Our reforms of the electricity market
have already created the world’s first low-carbon electricity market and
will stimulate up to 250,000 green jobs across the UK by 2020. Since
2010, energy demand has fallen by 2.5 per cent a year and renewable
electricity generation has almost trebled.
But we need to go further and faster to meet our goal of reducing

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

energy demand by 50 percent by 2030; if we don’t speed up
investment in energy efficiency our homes and buildings will continue
to leak energy and waste money.

We will:
•	 Make saving energy a top infrastructure priority, stimulating private
sector demand with our new Electricity Demand Reduction market,
new market-shaping energy efficiency standards and a programme
of tax incentives and public investment.
•	 Stimulate a minimum of £100 billion more private investment in lowcarbon energy infrastructure by 2020.
•	 Set a legally-binding decarbonisation target range for 2030 for
the power sector of 50-100g of CO2 per kWh, which will largely be
achieved by expansion of renewable electricity, with an indicative
target of 60% of electricity generation from renewable sources by
2030.
•	 Regulate to end the use of unabated coal in electricity generation by
2025 because of its high carbon emissions and impact on local air
quality, and require any new gas stations built after 2030 to be fitted
with Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) technology.
•	 Boost UK-wide community energy investment by rapid
implementation of Britain’s first ever Community Energy Strategy.
•	 Accept that new nuclear power stations can play a role in lowcarbon electricity supply provided concerns about safety, disposal
of waste and cost are adequately addressed and without public
subsidy for new build.
•	 Continue to back new entrants to the energy market to promote
proper competition against the ‘Big 6’.

2.6 Green jobs and industry
New world markets are developing in low-carbon and resourceefficient technologies. Britain’s real strengths in sectors such as
offshore wind power and low carbon vehicles, and in green finance,
make us well placed to compete.
We must make sure green industries can reach their full potential and
build on successes in increasing recycling to shift towards a so-called
‘circular economy’ in which we use natural resources efficiently. w

23

24

Shared prosperity: Building a sustainable economy

We will:
•	 Set a new target for Zero Carbon Britain by 2050.
•	 Realise the full potential of the Green Investment Bank by increasing
its capitalisation, expanding its remit, allowing it to raise funds
independently and enabling it to issue green bonds.
•	 Place the Natural Capital Committee on the same statutory footing
as the Committee on Climate Change, and task it with identifying the
key natural resources being used unsustainably and recommending
legally binding targets for reducing their net consumption; and
introduce incentives for businesses to improve resource efficiency.
•	 Include steadily higher green criteria in public procurement policy.
•	 Increase research and development in four key low-carbon
technologies where Britain could develop its leading position into
a global green industry: tidal power, Carbon Capture and Storage,
energy storage and ultra-low emission vehicles.
•	 Support ambitious EU vehicle emission standards and encourage
the market for electric vehicles. We will set a target of 2040 for the
date after which only ultra-low-carbon vehicles will be permitted on
UK roads for non-freight purposes.

2.7 Fairness and flexibility in the workplace
Britain’s employment laws are among the best in the world, balancing
the needs of business for flexibility with the rights of staff to fair
treatment. Liberal Democrats in government have abolished default
retirement ages so older people can’t be forced out of work simply
because of their age, and extended the right to request flexible
working. Modern workplaces increasingly understand the value
of flexibility, training and participation for both staff and bosses.
Nonetheless there are still too many examples of low pay, exploitation,
and bad practice.

We will:
•	 Encourage employers to provide more flexible working, particularly
for parents and carers, expanding shared parental leave with a ‘useit-or-lose-it’ month for fathers to encourage them to take time off
with young children.
•	 Use transparency to drive fair pay: require companies with over 250
employees to publish information on gender pay differences, declare
the number of people they employ on less than the living wage, and
provide information comparing the top and median pay levels of
their staff. We will also require companies to consult employees on
executive pay as recommended by the High Pay Commission.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

•	 Ask the Low Pay Commission to look at ways of raising the National
Minimum Wage, without damaging employment opportunities, and
improve enforcement action.
•	 Establish an independent review to consult on how to set a fair
Living Wage, working with stakeholders such as the Living Wage
Foundation. We will ensure this Living Wage is paid by all central
government departments and executive agencies from April 2016
onwards, and encourage other public sector bodies including local
authorities to do likewise.
•	 Clamp down on any abusive practices in relation to zero hours
contracts.
•	 Continue the drive for diversity in business leadership and
encourage women entrepreneurs.

2.8 An open, trading nation
As a major global economy, we must work to promote open markets
and free trade, both within the European Union and beyond it. Only as
a full member of a reformed European Union can we be certain Britain’s
businesses will have access to markets in Europe and beyond.
Liberal Democrats believe in a society which welcomes those from
abroad who have something significant to contribute, and which gives
asylum to those genuinely fleeing persecution. While we must stamp
out abuse, we must remain open to visitors who boost our economy,
and migrant workers who play a vital role in business and public
services.

We will:
•	 Remain a committed member of the EU so we can work to complete
the Single Market in areas such as online industries, the energy
market and in services and help negotiate EU international trade
agreements, opening opportunities for British businesses.
•	 Continue to allow high skill immigration to support key sectors of
the economy, and ensure that work, tourist and family visit visas are
processed quickly and efficiently.
•	 Ensure the UK is an attractive destination for overseas students, not
least those who wish to study STEM subjects (Science, Technology,
Engineering and Maths).
•	 Continue to work to make sure the British tourism industry is able to
compete with other major world destinations and be a key generator
of growth in the UK economy. We will establish a Tourism Council
jointly chaired by the Business and Culture Secretaries. u

25

The Liberal Democrats are the only
party that puts the environment
at the heart of our thinking. In
the first two years of the next
Parliament we will bring forward
five green laws that will guarantee
a permanently greener Britain.

Green Britain
Guarantee:
Five Green
Laws
To introduce legal targets for biodiversity, clean air,
clean water and access to green space, establish the
Natural Capital Committee in law, extend the ‘Right
to Roam’ and establish new marine and coastal
reserves.

1. A Nature Act

26

3. A Zero Waste Britain Act
To set Britain on a path to a ‘circular economy’,
establishing a ‘Stern Report’ on resource use, with
binding targets and a clear action plan to reduce
waste and end landfill.

5. A Green Transport Act
To help establish a full network of charging points
for electric cars, incentivise greener travel choices and
update planning law to ensure new developments are
designed around walking, cycling and
public transport.

2. A Heating and Energy Efficiency Act

To boost renewable and district heating programmes,
bring in tough new energy efficiency standards for
homes, and step up action on fuel poverty – to cut
energy bills.

4. A Zero Carbon Britain Act

To strengthen the Climate Change Act targets,
introduce a decarbonisation target for the electricity
sector and end the use of dirty coal power stations.

27

28

????

3
Family finances:
Real help to get by
and get on
Liberal Democrats understand
that people can only truly fulfil
their potential when they aren’t
held back by everyday anxiety
about the cost of living and family
finances. That’s why we want to
put money back in the pockets of
those who need it most.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

29

30

Family finances: Real help to get by and get on

Liberal Democrats in government have cut taxes for people on low
and middle incomes, to help families get by. We’ve improved childcare
support, reformed benefits to make sure work pays and improved back
to work support. And we've freed up pension savings to give older
people more choice.
We will continue to rebalance the tax system away from hard work
and towards unearned wealth, stamping out tax avoidance. We will
increase availability of childcare to help parents who want to work.
We will continue to reform welfare and build support back into our job
centres. We will make sure enough homes get built, every year, to help
keep prices within reach of all families. We will build on our worldleading reforms to our pensions system. And we will fight tirelessly for a
better deal for consumers.

3.1 Fair taxes
During this Parliament we have gone even further than our manifesto
pledge to raise the personal income tax threshold to £10,000 per
annum. The rise to £10,500 will have lifted three million people out of
income tax altogether and delivered a tax cut of up to £800 for millions
of low and middle income taxpayers.
We will continue our reforms to make taxes fairer and simpler, help
those on low and middle incomes, and ensure that those on the highest
incomes make a fair contribution.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

A Record of Delivery

A Promise of More

Given an £800 tax cut to low and
middle income earners by letting
you earn £10,500 tax free.

Raise the personal allowance
to at least £12,500, cutting your
taxes by an extra £400.

Secured the biggest ever cash
rise in the state pension with our
“triple lock” policy on uprating.

Legislate to make the triple lock
permanent, guaranteeing decent
pension rises every year.

Increased free nursery places
and introduced tax-free
childcare to refund up to £2,000
of childcare costs per child.

More free childcare: moving to
20 hours a week for working
families from the end of paid
maternity leave right through to
school.

Nearly 200,000 new affordable
homes.

Help keep house prices and
rents affordable by aiming to
boost house building to 300,000
a year.

Cut £50 off household energy
bills through policy changes,
and boosted competition and
switching – which can save
households up to £200 and
potentially more.

Cut energy bills for everyone
with more competition, easier
switching and a national
programme to insulate
homes – with a Council Tax cut
if you take part.

We will:
•	 Raise the tax free personal allowance to at least £12,500 by the
end of the next parliament. This will help both those in work and
pensioners.
•	 Consider, as a next step, and once the personal allowance rise
is delivered, raising the employee national insurance threshold to
the income tax threshold, as resources allow, while protecting low
earners’ ability to accrue pension entitlements.
•	 Ensure that those with the highest incomes and wealth are making a
fair contribution by: introducing a banded High Value Property Levy
(the ‘Mansion Tax’) across the UK on residential properties worth
over £2 million; limiting tax relief on pensions to a pension pot of £1
million; maximising revenue from Capital Gains Tax by more closely
aligning rates to Income Tax and introducing a de minimis capital w

31

32

Family finances: Real help to get by and get on

gains exempt amount on top of a single tax free threshold for both
income and capital gains; refocusing the Entrepreneurs Relief to
ensure it only helps genuine entrepreneurs and isn’t used as a tax
loophole for the super-rich; and scrapping the ill-conceived ‘Shares
for Rights’ tax loophole.
•	 Take tough action against corporate tax evasion and abusive
avoidance strategies, including by continuing to invest in HMRC, as
we have done in government, to enable them to tackle tax evasion
and avoidance, and introducing a general anti-avoidance rule.
•	 Restrict access to non-domiciled status.

3.2 Help with childcare costs
Many parents want to take significant time out from work to care for
young children but in many families both parents want or have to work,
and the costs of childcare are prohibitive.
We have made dramatic improvements over the current parliament
– with tax free childcare, increases in childcare support through the
benefit system and more free childcare hours for 2, 3 and 4-year-olds.
But we need to do more so that all who want to work can do so –
families need more free hours and help which starts earlier than when a
child is aged 3.

We will:
•	 Aim to make 20 hours of free childcare a week available for all
parents with children aged from 2 to 4, and all working parents from
the end of paid maternity leave (9 months) to 2 years, by 2020.
•	 Start by providing 15 hours a week of free childcare to the parents
of all 2 year olds, paid for by cancelling the ineffective Conservative
plan to introduce a marriage allowance into the tax system. Then
prioritise 15 hours free childcare to all working parents with children
aged between 9 months and 2 years.
•	 Complete the introduction of tax-free childcare which will provide
support to parents of up to £2,000 for each child and include
childcare support in Universal Credit, refunding 85% of childcare
costs to make sure work pays for low earners.

3.3 Making work pay
Liberal Democrats inherited a benefit system which trapped millions
on out-of-work benefits with no hope or aspiration for a better life, and
which meant that for many it simply did not pay to be in work.
Most people on out-of-work benefits want to find a job but need help

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

do so. People with health conditions have just as much potential as
everyone else if only they receive the support they need.

We will:
•	 Make work pay with policies such as raising the tax allowance, more
free childcare and free school meals for all primary school children.
•	 Complete the introduction of Universal Credit, in order to ensure that
people are always better off in employment.
•	 Tackle in-work poverty by giving people on low earnings help and
advice to move up to higher paid jobs.
•	 Tackle the causes of rising benefit bills, by building enough homes
to keep rents under control, radically improving access to free
childcare, tackling ill health that keeps people out of work, and
investing in skills.
•	 Remain committed to eliminating child poverty. We will introduce
the three child poverty targets which were blocked by our coalition
partners: reducing relative poverty, reducing gaps in life chances,
and reducing entrenched poverty.

3.4 Proper support for vulnerable people
Liberal Democrats believe everyone out of work deserves help to get
back on their feet. For too long, sickness benefits were used as a way
of parking people away from the unemployment statistics.
We need to get a better grip of the work assessments. We must
ensure assessments are fair to those who cannot work, while offering
support and challenge to those who can. We will invest in getting
proper help – from health care to employment advice – to all those who
need it.

We will:
•	 Deliver a reformed and improved Work Programme in partnership
with national governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland, and in England, local councils, to help people get back into
employment. We will ensure people with mental and physical health
conditions get the right support to get back to work through closer
working between the NHS and employment support providers,
recognising the link between employment and mental and physical
wellbeing. We will improve support for carers seeking to return to the
jobs market.
•	 Ensure the ‘work tests’ are fair, accurate and timely. We will review w

33

34

Family finances: Real help to get by and get on

the Work Capability Assessment and evaluate the merits of a public
sector provider. We will also ensure that assessments for Disability
Living Allowance and Personal Independence Payment are carried
out quickly and fairly.
•	 Simplify and streamline the system of back to work support we
provide for people with disabilities. We will aim for the goal of one
assessment and one budget for disabled and sick people to give
them more choice and control over their support.
•	 Introduce a ‘yellow card’ before benefit sanctions are applied to give
people a warning that their benefits could be withdrawn.

3.5 Help to save for and enjoy your retirement
Life expectancy is increasing. This is obviously good news, but it brings
challenges; if older people are to enjoy life to the full, they may need a
pension income that will last for 20, 30 or even 40 years.
We want to build on the world-leading reforms we have introduced
since 2010. We’ve abolished default retirement ages so older people
can’t be forced out of work simply on the grounds of age. We’ve
uprated the pension in line with our ‘triple lock’ guarantee. We’ve
introduced a new Single Tier pension to make saving simple. We have
auto enrolled 4 million people into a pension for the first time and we
expect to enrol 1 million more by the end of this Parliament. And we’ve
completely liberalised pension pots, so people can spend their savings
as they see fit.
We will work to ensure Britain is the best place in the world to save
for, and enjoy, your retirement.

We will:
•	 Introduce our simpler single tier pension so people can plan ahead
securely, and feel the benefit of every pound they save.
•	 Guarantee pensioners the best ever system for increasing the state
pension by legislating for our ‘triple lock’ of uprating by the higher of
earnings growth, prices growth or 2.5%.
•	 Ensure that pensioners are eligible to gain from our plan to increase
the personal allowance to at least £12,500 by 2020.
•	 Improve workplace pensions and continue to auto-enrol workers,
completing the roll-out of this scheme in full and on time.
•	 Press ahead with plans to allow people more freedom in the use of
their pension pots.
•	 Establish a review to consider the case for, and practical implications
of, introducing a single rate of tax relief for pensions, which would
be designed to be simpler and fairer and which would be set more

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

generously than the current 20% basic rate relief.
•	 Withdraw eligibility for the Winter Fuel Payment and free TV Licence
from pensioners on the higher (40%) rate of income tax. We will
retain the current free bus pass for all pensioners.

3.6 Affordable homes for all
For people to live fulfilled lives they need a home at a cost they can
afford. But that simple ambition is getting further and further out of
reach. Britain has failed for decades to build enough homes, and in
many places prices and rents have risen beyond what normal working
families can afford. Meanwhile many older people in homes that are no
longer right for their circumstances would like to move but don’t have
suitable options.
We have made a start in addressing this. Affordable rented housing
supply has been increasing. We’ve liberalised the planning system,
while protecting important green spaces. We have pushed government
departments to release unwanted sites for homes.
But the problems are now becoming a crisis, with the risk of a new
housing bubble, focused on London and the South East, threatening
economic stability as well as family budgets. We have to speed up
house building and stop prices from getting any further out of reach of
families. w

35

36

Family finances: Real help to get by and get on

We will:
•	 Set an ambitious target of increasing the rate of house building to
300,000 a year, and build to the Zero Carbon Standard.
•	 Within the first year of the next Parliament, publish a long term plan
which sets out how this goal will be achieved. Appoint a ministerial
taskforce on housing, hosted by the Cabinet Office, to oversee this
task.
•	 As part of this plan, publish proposals for at least ten new ‘Garden
Cities’ in England, in areas where there is local support, providing
tens of thousands of high quality new homes, with gardens and
shared green space, jobs, schools and public transport.
•	 Bring forward development on unwanted public sector sites through
the Homes and Communities Agency.
•	 Help social housing providers including councils to build more
affordable homes to rent, with central government investment and
local flexibility within the Housing Revenue Account. To maximise
total house building we will work with housing providers to design
new models of affordable housing, to sit alongside the traditional
social rented sector, including models that offer a path to ownership
for lower income working families.
•	 Require local authorities in England to allocate land to meet 15 years’
housing need in their local plans, and work with local authorities to
pilot techniques for capturing the increase in land value from the
granting of planning permission.
•	 Tackle overcrowding with a new system to incentivise social
landlords to reduce the number of tenants under-occupying their
homes, freeing up larger properties for larger families. We will
reform the policy to remove the spare room subsidy. The subsidy
will continue to be removed for new tenants in social housing but
existing social tenants will not be subject to any housing benefit
deduction until they have received a reasonable offer of alternative
social rented accommodation with the correct number of bedrooms.
We will ensure that tenants who need an extra bedroom for genuine
medical reasons or whose homes are substantially adapted do not
have their housing benefit reduced.

3.7 Protecting consumers and keeping bills low
We’ve driven competition in the energy sector with our reforms, but
in the next Parliament we want to go further: widening and deepening
competition and consumer protections in energy, and using the lessons

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

we’ve learnt to improve consumer rights across the board.
As more families rely on the private rented sector for their home,
we need a better deal for tenants, without putting undue burdens on
good landlords. Across financial services and insurance, we can use
data and technology to help people make smarter choices. And when
it comes to the products – from cars to electric mixers – we all rely on,
we can use smart regulation to drive up quality and cut costs.

We will:
•	 Build on the Green Deal with a national programme to raise the
energy efficiency standards of all Britain’s households and eradicate
fuel poverty – cutting people’s council tax bills if they take part. All
new homes will be Zero Carbon by 2016, and we will help tenants
afford to stay warm, with new energy efficiency standards for private
rented homes.
•	 Help people to form new energy co-operatives so they can benefit
from group discounts and cut their bills.
•	 Help people cut their energy tariffs by forcing energy companies to
allow customers to change to any cheaper supplier in just 24 hours.
•	 Give people easier to understand information about their own
personal energy use with a national roll-out of smart electricity and
gas meters. We will guarantee that anyone on a prepayment meter
can choose a smart meter instead by 2017.
•	 Promote the ‘double price tag’ approach – where the customer sees
both the purchase price and the annual running costs – for all cars
and domestic appliances.
•	 Improve protections against rogue landlords in the private rented
sector and encourage a new family-friendly tenancy to give people
more security in their home.
•	 Continue and expand the midata project and oblige insurance
companies to publish the increase in their insurance costs when they
send out their annual renewal notices.
•	 Require minimum Energy Performance Certificates in rented
accommodation. u

37

38

????

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

4
An opportunity
society:
World class
education for all
Liberal Democrats have put
education at the heart of our
agenda for a generation. We
believe every child deserves
a great start in life, and are
determined to make sure our
education system finds and
nurtures the best in everyone.

39

40

An opportunity society: World class education for all

A world class education system is essential to break down the unfair
divisions in our society, and to ensure a productive and world-beating
economy. Too many people have their chances in life determined by
who their parents were, rather than by their own efforts and abilities.
With our Pupil Premium, investing in children who might otherwise
fall behind, we are finally tackling the scandalous gap in exam results
between rich and poor. But we must do even more.
Children start learning from the moment they are born. So parents
need to be supported right from the start. Our plan for education
stretches from cradle to college: high quality early years education;
qualified teachers and successful schools in every community; more
money targeted to the children who need it most; flexible choices
for teenagers and young people to find the education – academic or
vocational – that suits them best; and world class training at college
and university to set every young adult on the path to a fulfilled working
life.
Education sets people free; that’s why Liberal Democrats will always
put education first.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

A Record of Delivery

Protected schools budgets and
introduced the pupil premium
to help children who might
otherwise fall behind.
Extra early years investment and
free school meals for under-7s.

A Promise of More
Extend the protection to all
education funding from early
years through school to college.
A revolution in the quality of
early years education with
qualified teachers in every
nursery and a larger early years
pupil premium.

Slimmed down the curriculum
to the basics every child should
know and set higher entry
qualifications for new teachers.

Parents’ guarantee: core
curriculum in every school and
every child taught by qualified
teachers.

Reformed school league
tables to ensure teachers help
every single pupil to fulfil their
potential.

Swift action to support and
challenge weak schools and
colleges.

Nearly 2 million new
apprenticeships, training our
work force for 21st century jobs.

A discount bus pass for under21s so they can afford to get to
college or work.

4.1 High quality early years education
If we want a more equal society, we have to help children right from
the start. Gaps between rich and poor children can open up incredibly
early in life, so we must get help to all those who might fall behind.
We must improve the quality of early years teaching, and raise the
status of those who work in early years.

We will:
•	 Raise the quality of early years provision and ensure that by 2020 every
early years setting should employ at least one person who holds an
‘Early Years Teacher’ qualification. We will recruit more w

41

42

An opportunity society: World class education for all

qualified staff with early years qualified status, and consider
extending full qualified status terms and conditions to all those who
are properly trained.
•	 Increase our early years pupil premium – which gives early years
settings extra money when they take on children from disadvantaged
backgrounds – to £1,000 per pupil per year, enabling settings to
really focus on helping children develop and get ready for school.

4.2 Driving up school standards
There is much to be proud of in our schools today, and much that has
been improved in the last few years. But far too many children are still
failing to get the qualifications they need. The gaps between rich and
poor are still too wide. We simply shouldn’t tolerate failure when it
comes to our children – especially when we know it’s the children who
need the most help who are the most likely to be let down.

We will:
•	 Protect the education budget in real terms right through from the
early years to age 19 – from cradle to college. We will at least protect
the schools’ Pupil Premium in real terms, consider carefully the
case for any extension of the Premium, and introduce a fair national
funding formula.
•	 Set a clear ambition that all children should master the basics
of Maths and English, with an aim to eradicate illiteracy and
innumeracy.
•	 Strengthen school leadership and governance. We will ensure
rapid support and intervention to help guarantee that all schools
become good or outstanding schools. Our Talented Head Teachers
programme will expand and help move top leaders to the areas
where they are most needed, and we will increase the number of
Teaching Schools – centres of teaching excellence and support to
other schools.
•	 Ensure that there is an effective, democratically accountable,
‘middle tier’ to support and intervene in schools where problems
have been identified. We will encourage local head teachers with
a strong record to play a key role in school improvement through
a local ‘Head Teacher Board’ which will work with schools and
local authorities. We will abolish unelected regional schools
commissioners.
•	 Allow OFSTED to inspect both local authorities and academy chains.
Local authorities and academy chains which are failed by OFSTED
for their intervention work will be required to work with stronger

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

organisations or will be replaced.
•	 Rule out profit-making schools, and only fund new mainstream
schools in areas where school places are needed. We will allow local
authorities to select the school sponsor, where this is not the local
authority itself.
•	 Extend free school meals to all children in primary education, as
resources allow and after a full evaluation of free meals for infants,
while ensuring that school food standards apply to all schools,
including academies.
•	 Ensure fair admissions for all schools.

4.3 World class teaching and qualifications
We want schools to have flexibility and freedom, but we also believe
parents and children alike need to know that the school curriculum will
cover the essentials, and that teachers will be skilled educators who
know how to inspire a love of learning.
That’s why we’ve developed our Parents’ Guarantee that every child
will be taught by qualified teachers, and the core curriculum will be
taught at every state funded school.
We want to build the status of the teaching profession, support
and nurture teachers in their work, and so drive up standards in every
school. Teachers deserve the respect that comes from being treated as
a true profession.

We will:
•	 Guarantee all teachers in state funded schools will be fully qualified
or working towards Qualified Teacher Status (QTS). Free schools and
academies will not be allowed to employ unqualified teachers from
September 2016.
•	 Introduce a clear and properly funded entitlement to professional
development for all teachers. We will raise the bar for entry to the
profession by requiring a B grade minimum in GCSE Maths and
English, allowing us to abolish the separate Maths and English tests.
•	 Help establish a new profession-led Royal College of Teachers,
to eventually oversee Qualified Teacher Status and professional
development.
•	 Establish an independent Educational Standards Authority (ESA)
entirely removed from ministerial interference. The ESA will be
charged with responsibility for curriculum content and examination
standards.
•	 Introduce a minimum curriculum entitlement – a slimmed-down core
national curriculum, which will be taught in all state-funded schools.w

43

44

An opportunity society: World class education for all

This will include a ‘curriculum for life’ including financial literacy,
citizenship and age-appropriate sex and relationship education.
•	 Complete the introduction of reformed GCSEs, while continuing
to oppose Conservative plans for a return to the old O-level/CSE
divide.
•	 Improve the quality of vocational education.

4.4 Helping young people to access work and learning
The education leaving age has now risen to 18, but the entitlement
to support for school transport now ends at 16. Bursary payments
are not always enough to cover rising bus fares. Some young people
are finding it expensive to access education, apprenticeships and
employment, and for many parents the travel costs are a huge burden
too.

We will
•	 Introduce a new Young Person’s Discount Card, for all young people
aged 16-21, giving an automatic 2/3rds discount on bus travel. This
will assist all bus users by helping to maintain the viability of existing
bus routes and making it easier to open new ones.
•	 Enable government departments, local councils and private
businesses to add discount offers to the Young Person’s Discount
Card.
•	 Help to fund this change by withdrawing eligibility for Winter Fuel
Payments and free TV licences from pensioners on the higher (40%)
rate of income tax.

4.5 A world class university sector, open to all
Liberal Democrats have ensured no undergraduate student in England
has to pay a penny up front of their tuition fees, and students do not
have to pay anything back until they are earning over £21,000 per year.
We now have the highest university application rates ever, including
from disadvantaged students.
But we need to ensure higher and further education remain
accessible to all those who can benefit. In the next Parliament we want
to get even more people going to university and do more to drive up
standards.

We will:
•	 Expand the number of full-time two year Foundation Degrees.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

•	 Expect all universities to support the national goal of widening
participation across the sector. This will include running summer
schools and setting up mentoring programmes between students/
alumni and schools pupils.
•	 Introduce more flexibility with a credit accumulation and transfer
framework to encourage more part-time study and help students
transfer between and within institutions.
•	 Establish a review of higher education finance within the next
Parliament to consider any necessary reforms, in the light of the
latest evidence of the impact of the existing financing system on
access, participation (including of low-income groups) and quality,
covering undergraduate and postgraduate courses.

4.6 Expanding and improving apprenticeships and
further education
More people have started an apprenticeship in this Parliament than
ever before. But it still isn’t enough. We want to aim towards a twin
track approach where every young person is either working towards a
university place or an apprenticeship and both paths have high status.
In a globalised world, where technology moves fast and industries
can be transformed overnight, we also need to establish lifelong
learning for all. No-one should expect to study just once in their adult
life.

We will:
•	 Increase the number of apprenticeships and improve their quality,
extending the Apprenticeship Grant for Employers for the remainder
of the next Parliament, delivering 200,000 grants to employers and
expanding the number of degree equivalent Higher Apprenticeships.
•	 Develop National Colleges as national centres of expertise where
there is demand and an identified need, such as renewable energy,
to deliver the high level vocational skills that businesses need in
these areas.
•	 Introduce lifelong learning accounts to give learners more control
over public investment in their learning and establish a cross-party
commission to secure a long-term settlement for the public funding
of re-skilling and lifelong learning.
•	 Improve provision of independent careers information, advice and
guidance for all, including through job centres for people seeking
new options later in life. u

45

46

????

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

5
A better place to live:
Health and
wellbeing for all
If we want people to live fulfilled
lives, we have to work to build
strong communities, deliver
high-quality public services, and
improve the environment we
share. We want every individual
to have access to great health
care, green spaces, culture,
community, sport and more.

47

48

A better place to live: Health and wellbeing for all

Good health is one of the most important assets we can have in life,
and we must do all we can to help people stay healthy, as well as
provide high-quality care when they are ill.
Liberal Democrats in government have started to reform public
services so they are more responsive to local communities, but we
must go further.
As Liberal Democrats, we believe that the voluntary sector has a
vital role to play in tackling social and environmental problems, and
will work to develop the contribution of volunteers and voluntary
organisations.
Improving our environment is a vital step to improving people's
health. If we cut air pollution we will have fewer problems with asthma
and bronchitis. If we open up more sports facilities and encourage
people to cycle or walk more, we can tackle obesity and reduce heart
problems.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

A Record of Delivery

A Promise of More

Protected the NHS budget in
real terms.

NHS budget will rise by at least
inflation.

Improved access to talking
therapies: 2.2 million patients
have now been treated since
2010.

Equal rights for mental health
patients to get treated just as
fast as people with physical
health problems.

Capped the cost of care, so
older people don’t have to sell
their homes to pay.

Introduce a new £250 ‘Carer’s
Bonus’ so carers can take a
proper break every year.

Planted a million trees and
protected our national forests by
blocking plans to sell them off.

Massively expand accessible
green space, complete the
coastal path and improve the
‘Right to Roam’.

Introduced a 5p charge on
plastic bags.

Commit to ending the use of
landfill in a generation.

5.1 A healthier society and a stronger NHS
The NHS is our most treasured public service and it must always be
protected and improved. We must do more to prevent illness and
disease, instead of just treating problems when they arise. And as the
population ages, that shift is becoming ever more essential.
We want an NHS which works for the changing needs of our society.
There are more people living with one or more long term conditions
than ever before and we need an NHS which is designed around the
needs of patients. That’s particularly true in mental health, where our
understanding of effective treatment is increasing all the time. But
mental health patients have too often been treated to a second class
service.
We need services which fit around people’s lives, not ones which
force them to fit their lives around the care they need. This means
moving away from a fragmented system which patients have to navigate
their way around, to an integrated service with more joined up w

49

50

A better place to live: Health and wellbeing for all

care. We believe these changes need to happen in a bottom up way,
suiting the needs of local communities. It will mean changing the way
services work though, including the way we train doctors and nurses to
provide care in different ways.

We will:
•	 Guarantee the NHS budget will rise by at least the rate of inflation
every year. We will commission a Fundamental Review of NHS and
social care finances in 2015, before the next Spending Review, in
order to assess the pressures on NHS budgets and the scope for
efficiencies. This will allow us to set multi-year budgets that will
be sufficient to maintain and improve the current standard of NHS
services, including keeping waiting times down.
•	 We will always ensure access is based on need and not on ability to
pay and that NHS remains free at the point of delivery.
•	 Reform the NHS payment system to encourage better integration of
hospital and community care services and better preventative care
for people with long term conditions. This would include more use
of personal budgets for people who want them and better access to
technology and services to help people get care closer to home.
•	 Secure local agreement on and pooling of budgets between the
NHS and social care.
•	 Encourage GPs to work together to improve access and availability
of appointments, including out of hours.
•	 Incentivise GPs and other community clinicians to work in more
disadvantaged areas.
•	 Act to improve the mental health of children and young people –
promoting wellbeing throughout schools and ensuring that children
and young people can access the services they need as soon as a
mental health problem develops.
•	 Deliver genuine parity of esteem between mental and physical
health, including by improving access and waiting time standards
for mental health services and establishing a world-leading mental
health research fund to improve understanding of mental illness and
treatments.
•	 Do more to tackle the causes of ill health, including promoting
healthy eating and exercise, making people aware of the dangers of
smoking and excessive consumption of alcohol and other drugs, and
helping to improve mental health and well-being.
•	 Invest in research and set ambitious goals to improve outcomes for
the most serious life-threatening diseases like cancer and long-term
conditions like dementia.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

5.2 Help for carers
With an ageing population, and more people living with chronic illness,
the number of people with caring responsibilities is rising – including in
the ‘sandwich generation’ who find themselves trying to care for their
children and their parents at the same time.
Carers are the unsung heroes of our health system and we need
to do more to help them. We have improved respite services in this
Parliament and fought hard to secure the cap on the cost of care
proposed by Andrew Dilnot. But we can and must go further.

We will:
•	 Introduce a new ‘Right to Respite’ package for carers, including an
annual ‘Carer’s Respite Bonus’ worth £250 for those carers looking
after someone for 35 hours or more each week over a 12 month
period.
•	 Implement the Dilnot Report proposals for a cap on the cost of
social care.
•	 Develop a ‘Carers’ Passport’ scheme to inform carers of their rights
in the NHS, assert their role as ‘expert partners in care’ and gain
access to support like free hospital parking.
•	 Raise the amount you can earn before losing carer’s allowance to
£150 a week.

5.3 Our green and pleasant land
Britain’s natural environment – the countryside, wildlife, city parks and
gardens and green spaces – is precious. Without our green spaces, we
would live less satisfying lives; they are critical to health, well-being and
our sense of community.
We will ensure that protecting the natural environment becomes a
core commitment of every government department and agency.

We will:
•	 Pass a Nature Bill to set natural capital, biodiversity, clean air and
water targets, and empower the Natural Capital Committee to
recommend actions to meet these targets.
•	 Massively increase the amount of accessible green space for
people to enjoy. We will complete the coastal path and introduce a
fuller ‘Right to Roam’, as put into practice by Liberal Democrats in
Scotland.
•	 Place the management of public forests on a sustainable footing, in w

51

52

A better place to live: Health and wellbeing for all

line with the recommendations of the Independent Panel on Forestry,
and plant a tree for every child born – about 750,000 every year.
•	 Launch an ambitious waste strategy to end the use of landfill,
including through targeted landfill bans, and complete the roll out of
charging for plastic bags.
•	 Implement comprehensive planning for the impacts of climate
change, including ensuring proper support for flood defences.

5.4 Food, farming and animal welfare
Our farmers do an essential job putting food on our table, enhancing
and protecting the natural environment, and keeping communities alive.
But food policy has been neglected for too long.
Liberal Democrats want continued reform of the Common
Agricultural Policy, eliminating the remaining protection and export
subsidies and developing new ways to ensure environmentally
sustainable solutions to the growing demand for food.

We will:
•	 Ensure farming support is concentrated on sustainable food
production, conservation, the environment and tackling climate
change, and work to restore habitats for bees and other flying
insects.
•	 Help increase the use of locally and sustainably sourced, healthy
and seasonal food, including for public institutions such as schools
and the NHS.
•	 Introduce effective, science-led ways of controlling bovine TB,
including by investing to produce workable vaccines. We will only
support extending the existing cull pilots if they have shown they can
be effective, humane and safe.
•	 Improve farm animal welfare and reduce the use of animals in
scientific research, including by funding research into alternatives.

5.5 Fair access to the arts, culture and sport
Liberal Democrats understand arts, culture and sport are essential for
personal fulfilment and quality of life – as well as vital for economic
growth.
We want all our citizens to be able to participate, and will build
on our record of improving access for all. We will break down elitist
barriers that keep some people away from the arts and culture, and
work to increase the accessibility of sports – including for disabled

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

people.
We believe in the power of the internet to free and enable people. We
aim to have one of the most digitally confident and connected societies
in the world by 2020. We will prioritise expanding digital literacy and
connectivity.

We will:
•	 Maintain free access to national museums and galleries, while giving
these institutions greater autonomy.
•	 Help support local libraries and ensure any libraries under threat of
closure are offered first for transfer to the local community.
•	 Require the Sports Ground Safety Authority to prepare guidance
under which domestic football clubs, working with their supporters,
may introduce safe standing areas.
•	 Protect the independence of the BBC, funded by the Licence Fee, as
the cornerstone of public service broadcasting in this country, and
protect the funding and editorial independence of Welsh language
broadcasters.
•	 Support growth in the creative industries, by continuing to support
the Creative Industries Council, promoting creative skills, supporting
modern and flexible patent, copyright and licensing, and addressing
the barriers to finance faced by small creative businesses. u

53

54

????

6
Secure communities:
Policing, justice and
the border force
No-one can live out their full
potential if they live in fear. By
ensuring our laws are upheld,
firmly and fairly, we can build
strong communities with
opportunity for all. Security
on our borders is particularly
important to help rebuild public
confidence in our immigration
system and so protect the open
nature of our society.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

55

56

Secure communities: Policing, justice and the border force

With Liberal Democrats in Government, crime is down ten per cent
according to both the independent Crime Survey and police records.
That means fewer homes burgled, fewer communities blighted and
fewer people hurt. But there is much more to do to reduce crime and
free people from fear.
The best way to help victims is to stop crime from happening in the
first place, whether by designing out crime or by smart punishments
that set offenders back on the straight and narrow. We will make sure
the number one job of the criminal justice system is to prevent crime by
cutting reoffending.
We have begun to tackle abuse in our immigration system, too,
closing colleges which abuse the rules, cracking down on illegal
working and human trafficking, and beginning to reinstate 100% border
checks. But our attempt to focus relentlessly on abuse has been
blocked by the Conservatives in government, so there is still work to be
done – first and foremost completing those essential border checks.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

A Record of Delivery

A Promise of More

Cut crime by ten per cent.

Establish a National Institute of
Crime Prevention to cut crime
with better policing.

Improved treatment for addiction
and mental health problems in
prison.

Cut crime with specialist ‘drug
courts’ that get addicts back on
the straight and narrow.

More prisoners working longer
hours, with wages contributing
to a Victims’ Fund.

Reform prisons to focus on
turning offenders away from a
life of crime.

Closed down bogus colleges to
stop fake students getting visas.

Bring back full border checks so
we know who’s coming in and
leaving the UK.

Tightened up English language
tests for people moving to
Britain from overseas.

Double enforcement of minimum
wage laws to tackle illegal
working and human trafficking.

6.1 Preventing crime and helping victims
Crime and fear of crime are amongst the greatest threats to our
security and our ability to live our lives to the full. Our focus is on trying
to prevent crime from happening in the first place.

We will:
•	 Design out opportunities for crime, by improving the built
environment, the design of new technologies, and community
resilience.
•	 End the use of imprisonment for possession of drugs for personal
use and move the drugs and alcohol policy lead from the Home
Office to the Department of Health. We will establish a Commission
to assess the effectiveness of current drugs law and alternative
approaches, including further work on diverting users into treatment
or into civil penalties that do not attract a criminal record which can
seriously affect their chances of employment. w

57

58

Secure communities: Policing, justice and the border force

•	 Create a National Institute for Crime Prevention, to provide evidence
and guidance of what works in fighting and preventing crime.
•	 Ensure that teachers, social workers, police offers and health
workers in areas where there is high prevalence of Female Genital
Mutilation are trained to help those girls at risk of being cut.
•	 Improve support for victims of crime.

6.2 Policing and organised crime
We are successfully bringing down crime and improving the efficiency
of our police forces, but there is more to do. We believe the police
could be far more effective with proper support and shared best
practice.

We will:
•	 Guarantee the police pursue the public’s priorities by replacing
Police and Crime Commissioners with Police Boards made up of
councillors from across the force area.
•	 Encourage police forces and other emergency services to work
together to reduce back office costs and exploit opportunities for
efficiency savings.
•	 Explore the case for transferring responsibility for more serious
national crime to the National Crime Agency.
•	 Work with EU partners to tackle serious and organised crime.

6.3 Improving justice and rehabilitating offenders
The criminal justice system doesn’t do enough to turn people away
from a life of crime. Far too many people are simply warehoused in
prison, instead of learning skills that will enable them to earn an honest
living when they are released.
Every time someone sets foot in a prison, or joins a programme of
community punishment, we must seize the opportunity to intervene,
tackle the problems they are facing and help them become positive
members of society again.

We will:
•	 Create sentencing options which are effective in protecting the
public, while reducing the risks of re-offending. We want to see
an enhanced role for restorative justice, and will do more to keep
young people and women out of prison. We will promote the use of
Community Justice Panels.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

•	 Reform prisons, so they become places of work, rehabilitation
and learning. We will encourage third sector providers to deliver
improved rehabilitation.
•	 Make more offenders perform unpaid work in the community to
ensure they pay back to their community.
•	 Provide experts on hand in courts and in police stations to identify
where mental health or a drug problem is one of the main drivers
behind an offender’s behaviour so they can be dealt with in a way
that is appropriate. We will pilot US-style drug and alcohol courts.

6.4 Restoring confidence in our borders
As supporters of a more open world, liberals have a keen interest in
ensuring there is public confidence in our immigration system. That is
why we have led the calls for full restoration of border checks on entry
and exit. And while people often welcome those who come here to
work, they do not support the small minority who come here simply to
claim UK benefits.

We will:
•	 Restore full entry and exit checks at our borders, to rebuild
confidence in immigration control, and allow targeting of resources
at those who over-stay their visas.
•	 Remove students from our immigration targets given their temporary
status, while taking tough action against any educational institution
which allows abuse of the student route into the UK.
•	 Double the number of inspections on employers to ensure all
statutory employment legislation is being respected.
•	 Require all new claimants for Jobseekers Allowance (JSA) to
have their English language skills assessed, with JSA then being
conditional on attending English language courses for those whose
English is poor.
•	 Encourage schools with high numbers of children with English as a
second language to host English lessons for parents.
•	 Work in the EU to tighten up benefit rules for migrants, including
reducing, and ultimately abolishing, payment of child benefit for
children who are not resident in the UK. u

59

60

????

7
Power to the people:
Freedom, democracy
and citizenship
Transferring power away from
Westminster and Whitehall and
returning it to people; restraining
the power of the state to snoop
into everyday life; building up
citizens and communities to
take control: these have never
seemed more essential battles
to fight and win.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

61

62

Power to the people: Freedom, democracy and citizenship

For freedom to be meaningful, people need the power not just to make
decisions about their own lives, but about the way their country, their
community, and even their workplace are run.
During this Parliament, Liberal Democrats have made a good start
on restoring the essential balance between citizen and state. We’ve
taken away the Prime Minister’s power to call elections. We’ve reformed
Parliament. We’ve devolved power to councils and communities. We've
scrapped Identity Cards. We’ve enacted the biggest transfer of fiscal
power from Westminster to Scotland in three hundred years. We've
supported employee democracy and the mutuals movement.
But we lost out to the Establishment in some of our attempts to
reform politics. From big constitutional changes like reforming the
House of Lords and giving citizens a stronger voice with fair votes, to
everyday freedoms like a stronger Right to Roam: our proposals were
blocked. We still believe these are essential changes and will work
towards them in the next Parliament.
Our time in government has not dimmed our enthusiasm for political
reform; rather, it has strengthened it. Transferring power away from
Westminster and Whitehall and returning it to people; restraining the
power of the state to snoop into everyday life; building up citizens and
communities to take control: these have never seemed more essential
battles to fight and win.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

A Record of Delivery

A Promise of More

Extended personal freedom
by scrapping ID cards and
introducing equal marriage for
gay and lesbian couples.

Protect your privacy by updating
data laws for the internet age
with a Digital Bill of Rights.

City Deals and Growth Deals to
enable local people to drive local
economic growth.

‘Devolution on Demand’ to
transfer more power and control
to local areas.

Passed a Lobbying Act to stop
improper influence of business
and lobby groups on politics.

Get big money out of politics
with a £10,000 cap on donations
and reform of party political
funding.

New financial powers for
Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland.

A new wave of devolution to the
nations of the UK.

Fixed Term Parliaments, taking
away the Prime Minister’s power
to call elections.

Better democracy with votes
at 16, electoral reform and an
elected House of Lords.

7.1 A decentralised but United Kingdom
We believe that too much power remains concentrated in Westminster.
We need to transfer power from Westminster and Whitehall to the
nations of the United Kingdom.

In Scotland we will:
•	 Take forward the recommendations of the Campbell Commission on
fiscal federalism for Scotland, including powers to raise the majority
of the money it spends, not least through control of the taxes on
incomes and wealth, and assigning to Scotland corporation tax
receipts from Scottish businesses.
•	 Give greater control over social protection, for example through the
power for Holyrood to deliver the Work Programme. w

63

64

Power to the people: Freedom, democracy and citizenship

•	 Begin work on agreeing next steps for Home Rule immediately
after a “No” vote in the independence referendum. Ultimately, we
recognise that transferring powers to Scotland has always been a
consensual process involving supportive political parties and those
from outside politics finding common agreement. That means:
v	
	
	
v	
	
	
v	
	

The Secretary of State for Scotland inviting the political parties 	
to a Conference on Scotland where they will discuss areas of 	
agreement and how they can work together and with others.
Appointing an individual in government to engage with 		
business, the voluntary sector and others to understand their 	
plans for decentralisation and powers.
The UK government stress-testing the options and ideas put 	
forward by those who want more powers.

In Wales we will:
•	 Fully implement the Silk Part 1 proposals on financial powers
for Wales.
•	 Move to a ‘reserved powers’ model for a Welsh Parliament as
recommended by the Silk Commission.
•	 Allow the Welsh Government to set its own bank holidays.
•	 Abolish tolls on the Severn Bridge once the existing construction
and repair costs are paid off.

In Northern Ireland we will:
•	 Continue to press for the full implementation of the Belfast
Agreement, including the reinstitution of the Civic Forum, and for the
further development of devolution in the context of a Shared Future
for the people of Northern Ireland.
•	 Establish a Commission for Devolution in Northern Ireland to review
the scope for further devolution of financial and constitutional
arrangements.
The nations of the United Kingdom have long had different needs with
regard to funding. The Barnett Formula is the mechanism used to
adjust spending allocations across the UK.
The Liberal Democrats have already delivered a substantial
extension of financial powers to the nations of the UK and we would
devolve further fiscal powers to the devolved governments. In order to
ensure reliable funding at this time, we will retain the Barnett Formula
as the basis for future spending allocations for Scotland and Northern
Ireland. We recognise the findings of the Holtham Commission that w

66

Power to the people: Freedom, democracy and citizenship

the current formula underfunds Wales and will commission work to
update this analysis. We will address the imbalance by immediately
entrenching a Barnett floor set at a level which reflects the need for
Wales to be funded fairly, and seek over a Parliament to increase the
Welsh block grant to an equitable level. Fair funding for all the nations
will then be secured.

7.2 Devolving power in England
Liberal Democrats believe that in England too, far too much power
remains concentrated in Westminster; ours is one of the most
centralised countries in the Western world and that has to change.
Only by returning power to the communities, villages, towns, cities and
regions of England can we drive growth, improve public services and
give people the freedom to run their own lives.

We will:
•	 Reduce the powers of the Department of Communities and Local
Government to interfere in democratically elected local government
in England.
•	 Remove the requirement to hold local referenda for Council Tax
changes in England.
•	 Build on the success of City Deals and Growth Deals, to devolve
more power and resources to groups of local authorities and local
enterprise partnerships, starting with back to work support.
•	 Introduce ‘Devolution on Demand’, enabling even greater devolution
of powers from Westminster to councils or groups of councils
working together (for example to a Cornish Assembly).
•	 Establish a commission to explore the scope for greater devolution
of financial responsibility to English local authorities, and new
devolved bodies in England.

7.3 Better politics
Unfair votes, over-centralisation of decision making, the power of
patronage and the influence of powerful corporate lobbies mean
ordinary citizens and local communities are excluded and side-lined
in politics today. We need to reform British politics to ensure that it is
more representative, more empowering of our citizens, and commands
greater public confidence.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

We will:
•	 Take big money out of politics by capping donations to political
parties, at £10,000 per person each year, and introduce reforms to
party funding along the lines of the recent report of the Committee
on Standards in Public Life, while funding these proposals from
savings from existing government spending on politics.
•	 Protect the rights of trade union members to have their
subscriptions, including political levies, deducted automatically from
their pay check, and strengthen their political choices and freedoms
by letting them choose which political party they wish to support
through such automatic payments.
•	 Introduce votes at age 16 for elections and referenda, and make it
easier to register to vote in schools and colleges.
•	 Reform the House of Lords with a proper democratic mandate
starting from the 2012 Bill.
•	 Reform our voting systems for elections to local government and
Westminster. We will introduce the Single Transferable Vote for local
government elections in England and for electing MPs across the
UK, while transferring responsibility for the local government election
system in Wales to the Welsh Assembly.
•	 Make Parliament more family friendly, and establish a review to pave
the way for MP job-sharing arrangements.
•	 Strengthen the role of MPs in amending the budget and scrutinising
government spending proposals.

7.4 Protecting our freedoms
In the modern digital age, the power of the state and of corporate
interests can threaten our privacy and liberty. We have achieved much
in rolling back the over-mighty state, but we cannot be complacent. We
need to control excessive state power, and ensure that in an era when
surveillance is easier than ever before, we maintain the right to privacy,
free speech, and open justice.

We will:
•	 Introduce a new Freedoms Bill, to protect citizens from excessive
state powers and improve rights of access to information.
•	 Ensure proper light touch regulation of the media. We support the
Royal Charter on Press Regulation based on the recommendations
of Lord Justice Leveson which, when fully implemented, will secure
regulation of the press that is independent of both government and w

67

68

Power to the people: Freedom, democracy and citizenship

•	

•	

•	
•	

industry. If in the judgment of the independent Recognition Panel,
there is significant non-cooperation on the part of the press, Liberal
Democrats will determine what further action (including considering
the range of legislative options set out in the Leveson report were
such circumstances to arise) is necessary to ensure that a Levesontype system of independent regulation can be made to work. Where
possible, we would seek to do this on the same cross-party basis
that achieved the construction of the Leveson scheme by the Royal
Charter.
Pass a Digital Bill of Rights, to define and enshrine the digital rights
of the citizen, protect people from unacceptable intrusion by the
state and by other organisations, and giving people more control
over their own data.
Identify practical alternatives to the use of closed material
proceedings within the justice system, including the provisions of the
Justice and Security Act 2013, with the aim of restoring the principle
of open justice.
Back the principle of net neutrality and safeguard the essential
freedom of the internet while ensuring the reasonable protection of
individuals and businesses.
Ensure proper oversight of the security services.

7.5 Equality and diversity
A fair society should treat its citizens equally and with dignity. In this
Parliament there have been key advances in the fight for equality – such
as introducing same-sex marriage and banning age discrimination.
But we must continue our work to fight prejudice based on race, age,
religion, sex, sexuality, and disability.

We will:
•	 Use our policies on tax, welfare, education, childcare, workplace
rights, and more to fight inequality. We believe that action to
advance equality should be embedded in every policy area, and not
treated as an add-on extra.
•	 Give legal rights and obligations to cohabiting couples in the event of
relationship breakdown or a partner dying without making a will.
•	 Promote international recognition of same sex marriages and civil
partnerships.
•	 Improve the safeguards in relation to police stop and search
powers in England and Wales including through tighter guidance
and by making the wearing of body cameras by officers mandatory
in Section 60 stop and search areas. We will also boost police

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

recruitment of black and minority ethnic groups.
•	 Permit humanist weddings.
•	 Encourage the spread of ‘name blank’ recruitment in both the public
and private sector so that people are judged on their true abilities to
do a job.

7.6 Everyday democracy
To lead a fulfilled life, people need power over more than just their
government. Liberal Democrats believe in creating strong communities
that respond to the needs of individuals, and giving workers a voice at
work, too. We will spread democracy in everyday life by encouraging
mutuals, cooperatives, and employee participation and by increasing
the opportunities for people to take democratic control over the
services on which they rely.

We will:
•	 Aim to increase the numbers of neighbourhood, community and
parish councils and promote tenant management in social housing.
•	 Encourage employers to promote employee participation and
employee ownership.
•	 Strengthen worker participation in decision-making.
•	 Spread mutual structures and employee participation through the
public sector.
•	 Strengthen community rights to run local public services, and
protect community assets such as pubs through the planning
system and by bringing forward a Community Right to Buy. u

69

70

????

8
Britain in the world:
Global action for
security and prosperity
In a more globalised,
interdependent world, freedom
for individuals is no longer best
protected solely by the nation
state. Liberal Democrats are
internationalists because we
understand that by working
together, countries can achieve
more than they can alone.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

71

72

Britain in the world: Global action for security and prosperity

In a more globalised, interdependent world, freedom for individuals
is no longer best protected solely by the nation state. Corporations,
banks and markets now operate across the globe with little respect for
national borders, with some ready to play countries against each other
to escape tax and regulation. Climate change, the greatest challenge
of our age, is by its nature global. And criminals, hackers and terrorists
now operate across borders, too.
Liberal Democrats are internationalists because we understand that
by working together, countries can achieve more than they can alone.
Liberal Democrats have worked tirelessly in government to keep
Britain at the heart of the European Union, able to secure the best deal
for British citizens. Our ministers have represented the UK across the
world on vital issues from climate change to nuclear disarmament and
secured agreements that will keep us all safer. We have stood up for
human rights, the rule of international law and humanitarian aid.
We will work with our allies and partners in the European
Union, Commonwealth, NATO and worldwide to engage with and
develop policy responses to governments which challenge liberal
internationalism and the rules-based system, encouraging these
states to contribute to a stable and responsible world order but firmly
asserting and defending our core values and international standards
when necessary.

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

A Record of Delivery

A Promise of More

Increased aid spending to 0.7%
of GNI.

Legislate to guarantee the UK
continues to meet the 0.7%
target.

Secured a record £23.9 billion
last year from clamping down
on tax evasion, avoidance and
fraud, and won G8 agreement on
transparency on the real owners
of businesses.

Extend the requirement for
country-by-country reporting
from banks and extractive
industries to all UK listed
companies.

Passed a law to guarantee
a referendum before Britain
passes any more powers to the
EU.

Ensure Britain plays a full part
in Europe and any referendum
triggered by Referendum Act is
on the big question: In or Out.

Rio +20 agreements on
sustainable development and
growing the green economy.

Work to secure binding global
agreement on cutting emissions,
and a commitment within the EU
to a 50% reduction by 2030.

Commissioned the first full
analysis of alternatives to the
Trident nuclear missile system.

Lead global nuclear
disarmament by reducing our
stockpile of nuclear missiles.

8.1 Global security
We need to act globally to secure our national interests and our
prosperity. The UK has a proud record of playing a leading role in
the European Union and in international institutions such as the UN,
G8 and the G20, and should continue to do so, wherever possible
promoting our values of freedom and opportunity for all.
Where all these institutions and policies fail, and we reluctantly
have to consider military intervention to protect ourselves and fulfil
our international obligations, Liberal Democrats are committed to
intervening only when there is a clear legal and/or humanitarian case,
endorsed by a vote in parliament, and to working within the remit of
international institutions wherever and whenever possible. w

73

74

Britain in the world: Global action for security and prosperity

We will:
•	 Work with our partners in the EU, NATO, the UN and the
Commonwealth to tackle security challenges and seek peaceful
solutions to conflicts worldwide.
•	 Work to engage with and strengthen multilateral institutions
worldwide including global bodies such as the UN and regional
groupings.
•	 Support the UN principle of ‘Responsibility to Protect’. This principle
focuses on the security of individuals, rather than states.
•	 Implement a policy of ‘presumption of denial’ for arms exports
to countries listed as countries of concern in the Foreign Office’s
annual human rights report.
•	 Act globally to tackle the threats of climate change and
environmental degradation.

8.2 Britain in Europe: prosperity and reform.
Liberal Democrats are committed to the UK’s membership of the
European Union, which helps to keep the peace, promote trade and
prosperity, and extend liberal values in and beyond Europe. Yet we

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

recognise that the EU is not perfect and is in need of reform – such
reform is best delivered by a United Kingdom that is fully engaged in
the Union, playing a full part in European discussions and working
effectively with like-minded member states.

We will:
•	 Remain a full and committed member of the EU, so we can play a
key role in shaping the rules of the Single Market and so we can
work to boost our global trade, tackle cross border crime and
address environmental threats.
•	 Work to reform the EU, so it offers better value for money, is more in
touch with the views of the people of its nation states, and does not
seek to interfere in matters which are better dealt with by national
governments and parliaments.
•	 Hold an in/out referendum when there is next any Treaty change
involving a material transfer of sovereignty from the UK to the EU.
•	 Retain control of our economy and our taxes.

8.3 Our armed forces and security services
The world remains a place of many potential threats, yet the defence
budget is under pressure, along with all parts of government spending.
The UK needs to retain a strong defence, which can only be done by
working with our NATO and EU partners.

We will:
•	 Maintain strong and effective armed forces, and set long-term
budgets to procure the right equipment at competitive prices.
•	 Remain fully engaged in international nuclear disarmament efforts.
•	 Retain our Trident independent nuclear deterrent through a
Contingency Posture of regular patrols, enabling a ‘surge’ to
armed patrols when the international security context makes this
appropriate. This would enable us to reduce the UK warhead
stockpile and procure fewer Vanguard successor submarines,
and would help the UK to fulfil our nuclear non-proliferation treaty
commitments.
•	 Improve the care of members of our armed forces by re-affirming
the Military Covenant, improving mental health service provisions
for serving personnel and veterans, and introducing a Veterans
Commissioner.
•	 Invest in our security services and act to counter cyber-attacks. w

75

76

Britain in the world: Global action for security and prosperity

8.4 International action on the environment
Liberal Democrats have always adopted an open and internationalist
approach, particularly crucial when it comes to environmental
policy. Pollution is no respecter of national borders, and wildlife and
ecosystems are not restrained by political boundaries. Challenges
such as climate change or deforestation are too massive for individual
countries to tackle alone.

We will:
•	 Argue for a 50% reduction in EU greenhouse gas emissions by 2030,
while ensuring that the UK meets its own commitments and so can
play a leadership role within Europe and internationally on efforts to
combat climate change.
•	 Work to secure agreement on a global climate treaty at the 2015 UN
Climate Conference.
•	 Argue for EU and global commitments to zero net deforestation,
globally, by 2020 and provide greater resources for international
environmental cooperation.
•	 Ensure that UK and EU development aid, free trade and investment
agreements support environmentally sustainable investment.

8.5 International development
It is unacceptable that people should live in absolute poverty in the
21st Century. Building on the significant progress made over the past
fifteen years towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, and
in particular halving the proportion of people living in absolute poverty,
we will work with others to seek to eliminate absolute poverty by 2030
– through aid but also, and even more importantly, through promoting
economic development and tackling unacceptable tax avoidance
activities.

We will:
•	 Maintain our commitment to spend 0.7% of UK Gross National
Income on international aid and enshrine this in law. We will
adhere to the OECD’s definition of what activities count as Official
Development Assistance.
•	 Respond generously to humanitarian crises wherever they may
occur.
•	 Work to ensure the post-2015 development goals fully take into
account the need to leave no one behind and to safeguard the

Liberal Democrat Pre-Manifesto 2014

sustainability of the planet.
•	 Continue to support free media and a free and open internet around
the world, championing the free flow of information.
•	 Lead international action to ensure global companies pay fair taxes
in the developing countries in which they operate.
•	 Invest to eliminate within a generation preventable diseases such as
TB, HIV and malaria; ensure that people do not suffer discrimination
or disadvantage because of gender, sexual orientation, disability or
ethnic origin, including pursuing an International Gender Equality
Strategy, including recognition of women’s rights to education
and freedom from enforced marriage, and an international LGBT
strategy; and aim to end female genital mutilation worldwide within
a generation. u

77

A Stronger Economy and a Fairer Society - Policy Paper 121
This paper has been approved for debate by the Federal Conference by the Federal
Policy Committee under the terms of Article 5.4 of the Federal Constitution.
General Election Manifesto Working Group
Note: Membership of the Working Group should not be taken to indicate that every
member necessarily agrees with every statement or every proposal in this Paper.
David Laws MP (Chair)
Sharon Bowles (Vice Chair)
Duncan Brack (Vice Chair)
Baroness Brinton
Nick Clegg MP
Tim Farron MP
Duncan Hames MP

Dr Julian Huppert MP
Lord Shipley
Dr Julie Smith
Jo Swinson MP
Jenny Willott MP
Munira Wilson

Staff:
Christian Moon
Steve O'Neil
Alec Newton

The Manifesto Working Group would welcome comments on the paper. These can
be sent to: Christian Moon, Policy Unit, LDHQ, 8-10 Great George Street, London
SW1P 3AE, email christian.moon@libdems.org.uk

ISBN: 978-1-907046-94-0 © August 2014
Further copies of this paper may be obtained, price £5 from:
Liberal Democrat Image, PO BOX 443, Farnborough, Hampshire, GU14 4DA
Tel: 01252 510 005 Email: libdemimage@ldimage.demon.co.uk
Printed by: Colourview Print Solutions
Design by: Steven Lawson

