Green Party response to the Government consultation on
a proposed Bill of Rights and Responsibilities
by Matt Follett, based on research by James Burgess
The Green Party believes that the fundamental, inalienable rights of each
person in a democratic society must be set out in a written constitution. The
Green Party welcomes the debate on a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities as a
key step towards such a constitution.
We are concerned that the current debate on a Bill of Rights and
Responsibilities has come about, as Liberty note1, not through a concern for
protecting human rights, but through a desire to extend Government powers
in these areas. The Conservatives have called for the Human Rights Act
(HRA) to be scrapped, and would abolish the Act with their version of a
British Bill of Rights and Responsibilities. Labour has repeatedly undermined
the provisions in the HRA through legislation and policy-making in the areas
of anti-terror, criminal justice, policing and asylum, despite being the
Government to bring in the Act. The Government have also done little to
explain or promote the HRA to the public2.
The Government Green Paper does not clearly distinguish human rights from
other rights and issues of social justice, and the resulting discussion is
somewhat unfocused. As a result, it risks down-grading the importance of key
rights and liberties.
The Green Party sees a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities as an opportunity to
protect those well-justified human rights expressed in the European
Convention on Human Rights, as well as to secure other rights that we believe
to be important for everyone living in the UK. Whilst the HRA provides
important protection of some human rights and civil liberties, it does not go
far enough. As a start, the Government should fully incorporate the European
Convention on Human Rights into UK law, with full legal backing. Below we
discuss other areas of rights and social justice which we also see as fit for
inclusion in a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities.
Whilst the both Labour and the Conservatives want to introduce a Bill of
Rights and Responsibilities to highlight the responsibilities of individuals, and
to promote “good behaviour,”3 the Green Party views responsibilities not as a
counterbalance to individual and collective rights, but as integral with them.

“Liberty’s evidence to the Joint Committee on Human Rights on the Rights
on the Rights and Responsibilities Green Paper published by the Ministry of
Justice,” July 2009.
2 Ibid. p. 4.
3 Francesca Klug, “Protecting rights: how do we stop rights and freedoms
being a political football?” (p. 4) Unlock Democracy article 2009.
1

1

Human rights discourse often draws on the universal nature of such rights.
Accepting the universal dimension to the concept of human rights requires
recognition of the cultural dimension, in that different cultures do not always
share the same view of what constitutes a good life. The Green concept of
responsibilities as an integral part of rights transcends such possibly
conflicting views. It is everyone's responsibility to allow space for differing
value systems, while ensuring that their own concept of rights does not curtail
recognition of their responsibilities towards all humankind and the life
support system.
Should a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities be introduced in the UK, the
Government should consider ways of ensuring that all those affected by the
Bill have direct democratic involvement in the process.

Responsibilities
The Green Party believes that no rights should be contingent upon
responsibilities. It is useful, however, to express the responsibilities that
individuals and groups have. We are concerned that the debate on
responsibilities has focused around prescriptions on the behaviour of citizens.
Citizens’ responsibilities should be seen as integral with individual and
collective rights, rather than as a counterbalance to them. The discussion of
the responsibilities of elected representatives would be a welcome addition to
the debate, and the Green Party believes that these responsibilities should also
be included in a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities.
Criminal Justice
On the duty to obey the law
The Green Party seeks to maximise the extent to which obedience to laws is
based on consent and to minimise the need for conformity through
deterrence. Citizens should be able to live in safety, free from interference and
free to lead fulfilling lives, protected by just laws. However, there is no
automatic moral obligation on all people to obey their governments, and there
are occasions when people may openly and peacefully protest an unjust law.
The Green Party endorses the right to civil disobedience and to protest
peacefully against unjust laws and practices.
Rather than prescribing a duty to obey the law, responsibility in this area
should relate more to working collectively to address circumstances that can
lead to criminal activity before that stage is reached, and to tackle what has
become criminal behaviour under the Labour Government (e.g. antisocial
behaviour).
Education, Children and the Family
The Green Party believes that a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities should fully
incorporate the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. This would
2

provide a strong foundation from which the Government can fulfil the
responsibilities it has to help children achieve wellbeing.
Economic Responsibilities
On the duty to pay taxes
The Green Party agrees that a duty to pay taxes should be included in a Bill of
Rights and Responsibilities, but the taxation system must be fair, genuinely
progressive and democratically accountable. A Bill of Rights and
Responsibilities should give responsibility to citizens to democratically
approve public expenditure at a local and national level, through the most
direct method practicable. The Bill should also allow for citizens and groups
of citizens to democratically oppose certain expenditure.
Civic responsibilities
On the duty to vote
The Green Party believes that whilst democratically taking part in civic life is
important, and part of what it means to lead a fulfilling life as a citizen, there
should not be any obligation to vote. The emphasis here should be on
providing the structures that facilitate the most direct form of democracy,
from the local level up.
On the duty to treat NHS and other public sector staff with respect
People’s good behaviour towards public sector staff, and indeed all other
people, could be fostered in a stronger, more caring society, rather than by
prescription in a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities. However, it may be
appropriate to include principles of equality and respect for all people in such
a Bill.
Living within environmental limits
The environment is too important an area to leave decisions on its welfare
solely to Government or Parliament, which are swayed by partisan party
political lines and vested interests. It is essential that rigorous, strong
principles of environmental protection and genuinely sustainable practices be
protected in a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities.
The current UK principles on sustainable development do not go far enough in
their measures to protect the environment. The definition of sustainable
development provided in the government Green Paper is routinely used to
justify many current unsustainable practices. It is humankind’s responsibility
to enhance or maintain the quality, diversity, integrity and wholesomeness of
human society and the life support system. Those activities which are
exploitative, or threaten either the well-being of others, society, the life
support system or the future of these must be avoided.

3

Other countries have successfully incorporated environmental protection into
their written constitution, notably Ecuador. There is no reason why the
responsibilities we all have in relation to the environment cannot be included
in a well-worded Bill of Rights and Responsibilities.
A thorough, informed public debate, beyond the scope of this Green Paper
consultation, must be carried out on the environmental responsibilities of
citizens, the government, businesses and groups.
Areas of Government responsibility
The Green Party would like to see a public discussion around which areas of
Government responsibility should be included in a Bill of Rights and
Responsibilities. These responsibilities might cover the responsibility for
good public administration, which we discuss below in the rights section; the
responsibility to protect against unfair discrimination; greater accountability
of elected representatives ; the responsibility to fairly represent constituents
and the views of constituents at a local and national level, and; the
responsibility to facilitate public debate, and civic participation in decisionmaking.

Rights
As stated in the introduction, the European Convention on Human Rights
should be fully incorporated into UK law, and should be included in full in a
Bill of Rights and Responsibilities, with legal backing. The Green Party
favours a Bill that would provide full legal redress in the case of breaches of
rights.
Criminal justice
On the rights of detainees, and the rights of those accused of a crime to a fair
trial
Any Bill should address the use of secret evidence – evidence that the
defendant is not allowed to see – and guarantee that the rights of those
accused of a crime include being able to know the accusations levelled and
having sight of any evidence. At present these rights are not universally
upheld by eg the Special Immigration Appeals Commission and this
undermines the right to a fair trial. The Green Party would also like to see an
urgent review of the so-called exceptional measures that have become the
norm in suppressing dissent, eg anti-terror legislation that has been routinely
used against protesters, members of the press and so forth.
In order to provide full protection, including against serious miscarriages of
justice, the rights of detainees, and those accused of a crime, must be upheld
in a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities.

4

On the rights of criminals and terrorists
The rights of criminals, terrorists and other unpopular minority groups must
similarly be upheld in the Bill, in keeping with the principle that human rights
are inalienable and fundamental.
On habeas corpus
The Government proposes in its Green Paper that the principle of habeas
corpus be kept out of a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities on the grounds that
the right to be free from unlawful or arbitrary detention is clearly embodied in
the European Convention and in the Human Rights Act. However, we have
seen time and time again the Government seeking to extend the permitted
period of detention without trial. Already it is far too long and since
introducing the Human Rights Act, the government have gone about breaking
down the protections offered in order to extend executive power. We need an
explicit affirmation of habeas corpus in a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities to
curtail the erosion of civil liberties we face now, and to protect against such
erosion again in the future.
Equality
The Green Party proposes principles of equality grounded in a respect for
rights and responsibilities. A Bill of Rights and Responsibilities should
recognise that a healthy society is based on voluntary cooperation between
empowered individuals, free from discrimination based on race, gender,
disability, sexual orientation, age, religion, social origin or any other
prejudice. The legitimate interests of all people are of equal value. Everyone
has a right to construct their own conception of the good life, whilst ensuring
that their own concept of the good does not curtail recognition of their
responsibilities towards the rest of humankind and the environment or in
anyway restrict space for differing value systems.
Public administration
Principles of good public administration should be included in a Bill of Rights
and Responsibilities as a step towards their inclusion in a written UK
constitution.
We live in a state where over centuries of struggle some democratic rights and
institutions have gradually been grafted on to a feudal monarchy. In that
feudal monarchy all power flowed downward from the monarch, and the
people were subjects and not citizens. Gradually some of that power has been
delegated to bodies like Parliament, or to local authorities, and citizens have
acquired some rights. However, we still retain many of the elements of its
feudal past, including some remnants of the royal prerogative. We believe
that the basic principle of Government should be the reverse of this; power
should flow upwards from the people, and from their most local levels of
Government to the higher levels.

5

The Green Party believe we are a long way off the ideal state of affairs, and to
get there much reform is first required. As such, the views on good
administration set out below are aspirational, and their inclusion in a Bill of
Rights and Responsibilities should be interpreted as such. In terms of legal
effect, we would recommend that Government has a duty to make substantial
progress towards reform.
All decision-making and action throughout all levels of government, including
international government, shall be governed by the principle of subsidiarity:
namely that nothing should be done centrally if it can be done equally well, or
better, locally. Government actions must always be subject to the rule of law,
which must be overseen by an independent judiciary.
The highest form of democracy is direct participation. This is best achieved
through the decentralisation of society, so that decisions can be made through
face-to-face discussion. All the major political decisions which affect our lives
should ideally be made with our active participation. This requires that as
much economic and social activity as possible should be carried out on a
human scale; that is, in a way that allows individuals and groups access to,
and influence over, such decisions. Direct democracy will encourage crossparty cooperation and weaken the hold of ideologies and factions.
Such direct democratic participation requires citizens to be able to access the
information they need in order to be able to take part in decision-making.
Freedom of information, and openness of government and its procedures, are
therefore integral principles in the creation of a more democratic and
decentralised society.
Given the scale of human activity in the world today, and the indirect impact
that much of this activity has on people living in different areas, it is clear that
not all decisions can be made locally. The best form of democracy for largescale activity is voting, in elections and referenda, in such a way that the
outcome reflects the pattern of voting and no vote is wasted. Delegated
authority and trust must be accompanied by full accountability.
Economic and social rights
Both Labour and the Conservatives are committed to excluding legally
enforceable economic and social rights from a Bill of Rights and
Responsibilities. The Government argues instead that the country should
meet social and economic needs through the Government’s policy decisions
and legislative programme, perhaps expressing some of the underlying values
that have given rise to the UK welfare system4 in a Bill of Rights and
Responsibilities. The argument is based on the premise that writing welfare
entitlements into a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities would put control of
resource allocation in the hands of judges, rather than a democratically
elected Parliament.
“Rights and responsibilities: Developing our constitutional framework.”
Government Green Paper, March 2009 (pp. 41, 43).
4

6

The Green Party position is that it is possible, and desirable, both to write
welfare entitlements into a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities and to retain
Parliamentary control of resource allocation.
On the issue of legal effect with respect to economic and social rights, the
Green Party largely supports the recommendations of the Joint Committee on
Human Rights set out in the twenty-ninth report of session 2007-085. The
report notes the findings of a previous report by the Committee on economic
and social rights6, which reported that although the substance of many of the
rights found in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights are currently covered by individual pieces of UK legislation, there were
gaps. Furthermore, where there were gaps, the UK courts could not always
give redress. The report “rejected the Government’s argument that all
economic and social rights are inherently non-justiciable,” and drawing on the
example of South Africa advised that such rights could be given further legal
effect whilst still retaining separation of the legislature, executive and
judiciary, and maintaining parliamentary control of resources7.
The Joint Committee on Human Rights recommends that the Government’s
obligations to respect economic and social rights of citizens should take the
form of “a duty of progressive realisation of economic and social rights by
reasonable legislative and other measures, within available resources”8. The
Green Party believes this should be the basic level of commitment from
Government, and would welcome measures that secure economic and social
rights more concretely.
Economic and social rights should include the following:
1. Full implementation of the European Convention on Human Rights,
with legal backing;
2. The Working Time Directive should be incorporated into a Bill of
Rights and Responsibilities, giving people the right to a fair pay and
more freedom in relation to their work life;
3. The right to basic material security for all, with provision of a wide
range of opportunities for personal fulfilment in both a material and
non-material sense;
4. The right to free health care, the right to social care, and the right of
terminally ill people to assisted suicide;
5. The right to pursue one’s own conception of the good, so long as this
does not contradict a person’s responsibility towards others and the
House of Lords and House of Commons Joint Committee on Human Rights,
“A Bill of Rights for the UK?” Twenty-ninth report of session 2007-08,
published 10 August 2008.
6 Twenty-first report of session 2003-04, The International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, HL Paper 183, HC 1188.
7 House of Lords and House of Commons Joint Committee on Human Rights,
“A Bill of Rights for the UK?” Twenty-ninth report of session 2007-08, p. 44.
8 Ibid. p. 48.
5

7

6.
7.
8.
9.

environment;
The right of all to decent housing, including the right of homeless
people to be housed;
The right to free education, to the age of 18;
The right to creative and rewarding work;
The right to democratic approval of resource expenditure at a local and
national level, through the most direct method practicable, and the
right to democratically oppose public expenditure.

Political rights
On the right to asylum and the rights of refugees
The Green Party believes that the right to asylum and refugee rights should be
included in a Bill of Rights and Responsibilities. A thorough public debate
over a period of time is needed on this subject before a final decision on the
specific rights to be included is made.
On the right to vote
The Green Party supports the inclusion of the right to vote in a Bill. The right
to vote and to stand in elections should be based on residence rather than
nationality, and the voting age should be reduced to 16.
Freedom of speech and right to dissent
Freedom of speech is glaring by its absence from the Green Paper. Whilst
there are provisions in the Human Rights Act for freedom of expression, such
rights are constantly threatened by attempts to curtail eg freedom of speech
and the right to protest peacefully.
The right to freedom of speech, the right to peaceful protest and the right to
freedom of assembly and association should be protected by law in a Bill of
Rights and Responsibilities.

8

