CONSERVATIVE
RAIL REVIEW:
GETTING THE
BEST FOR
PASSENGERS

conservatives.com

Executive Summary

1.1 The problem:
Our rail network is suffering from chronic levels of
overcrowding. We desperately need new capacity – longer
trains, longer platforms and, ultimately, additional lines.
The Government is not taking this problem seriously
enough, and nor is Network Rail, the company Labour
created to run the UK’s railway track.
Network Rail is not accountable to passengers (as
illustrated, for example, by the disastrous engineering
work overruns at New Year 2008) and is not given strong
enough incentives to respond to what passengers want.
Nor is Network Rail sufficiently responsive to its direct
customers, the train and freight operating companies.
The Department for Transport is micromanaging far too
much. Franchises are too short and so tightly specified
that there is very little scope for innovation or investment.
The franchise system is geared only to price, and not
quality of output, and is being used by the Government
to push train operating companies into squeezing
passengers with higher and higher fare increases.
Passengers are being priced off the railways to disguise
ministers’ failure to find a way to provide extra capacity.

1.2 A plan for change:
Our goal is to ensure the rail industry works more
efficiently and cohesively so that it delivers what
passengers want. We want a stronger, more unified crossindustry focus on tackling overcrowding and keeping
costs down. This will help take the pressure off rising
fares and provide better value for money to both the
farepayer and the taxpayer; and help to deliver the new
capacity we need. We wish to deliver these reforms
without major structural upheaval across the network.
The improvements we will make to the way the railways
are run include the following:
• Increasing the powers of the regulator to create
a Passenger Champion. Passengers should have a
one-stop-shop to complain to when things go wrong

and to represent their interests; so we will expand the
remit of the Office of Rail Regulation to create a
powerful consumer-focussed regulator with the power
to bang heads together to ensure that performance is
improved, regardless of where the fault lies. We would
give the regulator stronger powers to ensure Network
Rail delivers what passengers want, and we would
introduce tougher and more effective penalties for
failure, including strengthening the power of the
regulator to block the bonuses of senior management
where appropriate.
• Reforming Network Rail to make it more
accountable to passengers and train operators.
We will create a new supervisory board with a stronger
voice for passengers and train operators. It will have
the power to hold the Network Rail management to
account and to set the overall strategy for the
company.
• Setting the pace on high speed rail. A Conservative
Government will give the go ahead for a new high
speed line connecting Leeds, Manchester, Birmingham,
London and Heathrow. We see this as the first step in a
national high speed network which will see our line
extended to Newcastle and Scotland with further new
lines linking up major cities across the UK.
• Ending Whitehall meddling. Micromanagement
from Whitehall is getting in the way of innovation and
making it harder to deliver the new capacity that
passengers want. We would put an end to this by
radically scaling back the involvement of the
Government in areas such as timetabling and the
purchasing of new rolling stock.
• Better co-operation between the management of
track and train. We will strengthen and extend the
duties imposed on Network Rail to co-operate with
train and freight operators and keep them properly
informed on matters relevant to the efficient running
of services. We will seek to align Network Rail’s
regulatory incentives as closely as possible with the
concerns of train and freight operators and the

Getting the best for Passengers 1

passengers and businesses they serve. We will promote
collaborative working practices across the rail industry.
We will create a unified regulatory structure for the
industry and give train and freight operators a stronger
say in the governance of Network Rail. We also propose
to run 2 pilot schemes to assess the impact of unified
management of track and train.
• Longer, better franchises. Short franchises
discourage private sector investment. We will make 1520 year franchises the norm to give greater certainty
and encourage investment in new capacity. We will also
assess franchise bids more qualitatively – looking at
what they will deliver for the passenger, and not simply
on how much money they will pay to the Government.
• Promoting innovation in delivering rail
improvements. We will make funding for smaller
scale capacity enhancements, currently dealt with by
Network Rail, contestable and open to other providers,
including train operating companies, local authorities
and Community Rail Partnerships. This will improve
efficiency and help provide an important benchmark
for Network Rail’s performance.
• A moratorium on building on disused rail paths.
This will last for at least our first term in Government
and will conserve any disused railway lines still in
public ownership. As well as keeping alive the
possibility of reopening them to rail travel in the future,
protecting these corridors will also facilitate their use
by pedestrians and cyclists in the interim.

2 Getting the best for Passengers

2. Introduction

After a decade of Labour Government, our railways are
becoming more and more overcrowded and increasingly
expensive. The Government now has more control over
the railways than in the days of British Rail. Labour’s
politically-motivated interference too often prevents rail
professionals from solving problems quickly and cost
efficiently, meaning passengers suffer. And at a time
when concerns about climate change are becoming more
and more serious, the United Kingdom is not getting the
best from its railways, despite the advantages they offer
as a green form of transport for both goods and people.
A green transport strategy needs a thriving and growing
railway for both passengers and freight. If we are to have
any chance of reaching our environmental targets for
cutting CO2 emissions then we need to make rail
transport an attractive and realistic alternative to the car
and the lorry. Overcrowded and over priced trains provide
little incentive for people to get out of their cars or shift
their goods on to freight trains.
We need a plan for change.
A Conservative Government will
• put passengers first by empowering the rail regulator
to look after their interests and ensure that Network
Rail is given the right incentives to run the track
network efficiently;
• replace Whitehall meddling and interference with a
long term strategy to make the most of technological
innovation and secure rail’s environmental benefits.
Our strategy embraces large scale long term projects to
improve the rail network and relieve overcrowding. For
example, a Conservative Government would give the go
ahead for a new high speed line linking Leeds,
Manchester, Birmingham and London. We believe that this
should be just the start of a longer term programme to
deliver a new high speed rail network across the country,
including the extension of our line up to Newcastle and
Scotland.
However, we also understand the key importance of

improvements to the existing network - both large scale
upgrades and other much needed capacity enhancements
such as station improvements (including improved car
and bike parking facilities), longer trains, longer
platforms and more loops and passing places to unblock
key bottlenecks.
In delivering a more efficient railway, with a stronger
focus on tackling overcrowding and keeping costs down,
we believe that our reforms will help deliver the capacity
improvements we need, alongside a continuing
programme of public investment in upgrading our
railways.
Where necessary, we are prepared to legislate to deliver
our reforms. However, we anticipate that many of them
could be achieved through working in partnership with
the regulator. As a starting point, we would issue fresh
guidance to the regulator regarding our reform
programme.
The fundamental thrust of this review concerns the need
to improve the ability of the rail industry to meet the
challenging demands for new capacity. We do not
underestimate the need to address other important issues
such as light rail, station travel plans and the role of
smarter choices in encouraging rail use, ticketing, smart
cards and so on, but they are beyond the scope of this
current review.
While this review is not focussed on specific upgrades,
we feel it is important to summarise our approach to
electrification. There is a strong case for electrification
and we recognise the benefits it provides in terms of
capacity, reliability and emissions. Furthermore,
electrification opens up the possibility of making rail a
much greener form of transport in the future, as we make
progress on cleaning up and “decarbonising” electricity
generation in the UK. While it is not practical, at this stage,
for us to specify the detail of the electrification
programme that would be undertaken by a future
Conservative Government, we should make it plain that
a rolling programme to fill in the major electrification
gaps on the network will be an important priority for us

Getting the best for Passengers 3

within the constraints of what is affordable. A rolling
programme should help deliver the standardisation of
delivery methods which can help bring down the costs
of electrification.

2.1. Background – current structure of
railway industry
During privatisation in 1993, British Rail was divided into
two main parts: the national rail infrastructure (track,
signalling, bridges, tunnels, stations and depots) and
operating companies who run train services on that
network.
After the demise of Railtrack, the infrastructure was
transferred to Network Rail which is a company limited
by guarantee. They are responsible for maintaining,
improving and extending the infrastructure. Network
Rail’s financial and safety performance is overseen by the
Office of Rail Regulation (ORR). The ORR sets the
programme of work to be achieved by Network Rail and
the money that will be given for this work (the Network
Grant), within the overall budget and project specification
set out by the Department for Transport (DfT).
The train operating companies (TOCs) run passenger

services under franchises specified by the DfT. Depending
on the profitability of the route, TOCs either receive a
subsidy from the Government or pay premia back to the
Government. TOCs also pay an access charge to Network
Rail for the use of the track. TOCs generally lease their
trains from rolling stock companies (ROSCOs).
As well as the franchise holders, any potential operator
who identifies a new market for train services can apply
to become an Open Access operator running passenger
services in competition to the franchisee.
Goods moved on the railways are transported by freight
operating companies (FOCs) who are not franchised and
operate entirely in the private sector.

Source: Network Rail

4 Getting the best for Passengers

3. Labour’s failure on
the railways
3.1. Overcrowded railways
Overcrowding on our railways is getting worse. Between
1995 and 2005 there was a 50 per cent increase in rail
passenger travel,1 way outstripping increases in rail
capacity. Today, the most overcrowded trains on the
network are running at over 170 per cent of capacity.2
And Network Rail predicts that passenger numbers will
grow by 30 per cent over the next ten years.3 Many in
the rail industry believe this is an underestimate.4
Overcrowding is reaching crisis proportions, with a
significant impact on the quality of life of millions of
commuters. While the current recession may have an
impact on passenger growth, it will not solve the problem
and many commuter services will remain unacceptably
overcrowded.

3.2. Rising fares
The National Passenger Survey, conducted by Passenger
Focus, shows year after year that less than half of rail
users believe that they are getting value for money for
the fares they pay.5
Since 2003, regulated fares have increased faster than
inflation. Unregulated fairs have risen even faster.
According to ATOC, there has been a 30 per cent increase
in regulated fares and a 33 per cent rise in unregulated
fares since 2003.6 In difficult economic circumstances, it
becomes more important than ever to ensure passengers
get value for money for the fares they pay.
Fare rises come with tacit Government approval and are
often the direct result of the franchise process. Labour
have been using fare rises to drive people off trains
because they are unable to get a grip on overcrowding.
According to a DfT spokesman, fare increases on First
Capital Connect were ‘a good commercial solution to the
problem of overcrowding’.7 South West Trains, who
operate four of the twenty most overcrowded services
into London8, raised some fares by 20 per cent in May
2007.9 This was on top of a 5.3 per cent hike in regulated
fares and 4.3 per cent increase in unregulated fares in

January of the same year. Ministers admitted in Parliament
that South West Trains warned them that the terms of the
franchise agreement would lead to higher fares.10

3.3. Network Rail is not accountable to
passengers
Despite the subsidy to Network Rail (over £13 billion
since 2001-02, plus another £3.2 billion planned for this
financial year11), the company has not delivered the new
capacity for which passengers and freight operators are
crying out.
When Gordon Brown created Network Rail, he failed to
put in place mechanisms to ensure that the company was
properly accountable to passengers. This was graphically
illustrated by the problems with over-running engineering
works over New Year 2008 when thousands of
passengers and many freight companies faced delays and
hassle and were left powerless to do anything about the
situation. However, the problem manifests in other ways,
for example with the major restrictions Network Rail
engineering works place on Sunday services which cause
so much frustration for passengers.
While we recognise the hard work done by Network Rail
staff and management to keep our railways running
(often under difficult circumstances and during anti-social
hours), the structure set up by the Government has never
given the company sufficiently strong incentives to
respond to what passengers want. The sanctions
imposed where the company fails to perform are
ineffective. The £14 million fine imposed on Network Rail
after the 2008 New Year over-runs illustrates the problem.
Fining Network Rail can only have a limited impact since
the cost is ultimately picked up by the taxpayer.
The result is that Network Rail is not responsive enough
to its customers, the companies running passenger and
freight train services; and it is not treating the
overcrowding crisis as the urgent problem it is for so
many thousands of commuters across the country.

Getting the best for Passengers 5

3.4. Whitehall meddling
The Government’s 2005 Railways Act brought
unprecedented levels of control over the railways into the
Department for Transport. As a result the Government
now has more control over our railways than in the days
of British Rail. Franchises are drafted so tightly that there
train operating companies are left with little scope for
investment or innovation.
The Government buys or approves the purchase of the
majority of rolling stock, taking very detailed day-to-day
decisions throughout the whole process. The
Competition Commission recently reported that the
Government’s meddling in the procurement of rolling
stock was actually preventing the ability of ROSCOs to
get more trains onto the network.13 And absurdly, civil
servants are setting detailed timetables.
This level of micromanagement means that railway
professionals find it more difficult to deliver benefits
quickly, cheaply and efficiently to their customers. Taking
just a few examples:

6 Getting the best for Passengers

• The Department for Transport’s (DfT) control over
rolling stock procurement has prevented Virgin from
running extra Pendolino carriages on the West Coast
Main Line. Labour micromanagement has now delayed
the extra carriages needed to deal with overcrowding
until 2012, when the Virgin franchise ends. Meanwhile,
passengers suffer.
• The old Eurostar platforms at Waterloo remain
mothballed and out of use when they could be serving
overcrowded commuter routes in the south east.
• Despite spending £6.7 million since late 2005 on
consultants on the Intercity Express Programme, no
trains have yet been ordered and none are expected to
be in service before 2015. Progress on delivering new
carriages under the Thameslink project has also been
very slow.
• And, out of the 1,300 carriages promised for the rest
of the network in 2007, only a few hundred have been
ordered.

4. Standing up for the Passenger

4.1. Passenger champion rail regulator
No one could deny that the structure of the rail industry
is complex, or that this complexity can and does cause
disputes and problems. As we set out below, we do not
believe that radical structural change is the way forward
but there are steps that we can take to address some of
the frustration passengers feel when faced with a
complicated system with overlapping responsibilities.
At present, there is no single organisation with an overall
remit to ensure disputes between the different
organisations that make up the rail industry are resolved,
decisions are taken on time and progress is made. More
importantly, there is no one organisation that passengers
can contact if they wish to make a complaint and which
can deliver redress.
Passenger Focus is currently the main point of contact for
passengers dissatisfied with the service they get on the
railways. It does an excellent job with the powers it has
and the research it produces plays a key role in holding
the rail industry to account. However, it cannot compel
train operators or Network Rail to improve their level of
service. That is not its role.
Moreover, the rail regulator (Office of Rail Regulation) has
the power to regulate Network Rail but can do little where
train operators are failing their passengers. For example,
in seeking to tackle the problems on First Great Western’s
routes from 2006 to mid 2008, the regulator had the
power to require Network Rail to take action but could do
very little about the train company. That was down to the
Department for Transport, which dithered for months.

existing remit, we believe that the ORR should become a
consumer champion with the power to:
Advise the DfT on franchise bids;
• Judge TOC performance throughout their franchise
period;
• Enforce the consumer focussed conditions in TOC
franchises on behalf of the DFT;
• Levy tougher sanctions on underperforming TOCs;
• Set tougher performance targets for Network Rail and
enforce them proactively;
• Levy tougher sanctions on Network Rail if they fail to
deliver the required level of service, including more
extensive powers to block bonus payments to senior
management; and
• Monitor the value for money given by train operators
and advise the DfT on the operation of its fares policy
and its impact on passengers.
Transferring these powers from the DfT to the ORR would
create a more unified and integrated structure to oversee
the rail industry. It should ensure greater focus on
consumer satisfaction than is possible within a
government department which is subject to other
pressures and a wide range of competing priorities. And
it would make the whole process far less political. One of
the reasons why ministers dithered over First Great
Western was that the DfT was largely responsible for the
timetable that caused many of the problems in the first
place.

The changes we propose are aimed at allowing the
regulator to bang heads together and take effective action
against whichever organisation is responsible for the
problems passengers face.

Our reforms would help ensure a faster and more efficient
resolution of service quality concerns. For example in the
situation where a train operator is underperforming but
is not in breach of its franchise, a powerful consumerfacing regulator would be able to get all the relevant
people round the table, with the authority to make them
work out common sense ways to tackle the problem and
resolve any differences.

We would therefore transfer to the ORR many of the
oversight powers relating to passenger operators which
are currently vested in the DfT. So in addition to its

The need to give the regulator more effective powers to
block bonuses at Network Rail, where serious failures
occur, was graphically illustrated by the engineering

Getting the best for Passengers 7

overruns over New Year 2008. Despite the fiasco,
Network Rail’s senior executives were awarded £835,000
in bonuses and the only sanction faced by the company
was a fine which the taxpayer picked up. The net result
was £14 million less spent on the railways. We will ensure
that the regulator has effective powers to ensure that
there is no reward for failure at Network Rail.
We will require the ORR’s number to be posted on station
platforms and published on tickets. With the right to
complain directly to the regulator, passengers will have a
more visible and accessible point of contact to get
effective action taken to address their concerns.
The new responsibilities for the ORR will be different from
the independent research and passenger advocacy role
of Passenger Focus which would continue its excellent
work in much the same way that it does now. The work
of the two organisations will be complementary and we
will take steps to minimise any unnecessary overlap or
duplication. As is set out below, we would also like to see
Passenger Focus playing a role in relation to Network
Rail’s governance.

4.2. Reforming Network Rail
We will reform the governance of Network Rail to make
the company more responsive to its customers. We
believe their real customers are the train operators, and
the passengers and freight companies they serve – not,
as the Government seems to believe, the Department for
Transport. And yet neither passengers nor freight
companies had an effective means of redress after the
engineering over-runs which caused such mayhem at
New Year 2008.
As a company without shareholders, the only body to
which the company management is required to account
consists of members which they themselves (i.e. the
Network Rail Board) appoint. We believe that the
membership body is too large and lacks the powers to be
effective in holding senior management to account and
demanding improvements in performance.

8 Getting the best for Passengers

To strengthen Network Rail’s corporate governance and
accountability, we will introduce a supervisory board for
the company. We do not propose to introduce an entire
new corporate structure, or to replicate the supervisory
boards that are commonly used in other parts of Europe.
Instead, we will create a supervisory board from the
existing membership structure, with improved and
extended powers.
We will create a new slimmed down membership body,
which will be renamed the Network Rail Supervisory
Board, and will consist of around 10-20 people. In order
to comply with European legislation, the majority of the
members of this board will be from outside the rail
industry and consist of passenger representatives and
independent members with a strong background in
business and dealing with corporate governance issues.
The remainder of the members will represent passenger
operators, freight operators, open access operators, and
suppliers. The supervisory board will also have an
independent chairman.
The members of the new board will be appointed
independently of Network Rail and of the DfT. We
envisage the chairman and independent members being
appointed by an independent appointments commission,
in a similar way to NHS senior positions, overseen by the
Commissioner for Public Appointments, under the Nolan
Principles – the Seven Principles of Public Life. The other
members would be nominated by the sectors they are
representing and ratified by the same independent
appointments commission.
We will consult on the best way to put such a nomination
system into effect, working with the relevant industry
sectors and also with the different groups already
undertaking valuable and interesting work on reform of
Network Rail governance. We hope that Passenger Focus
would play a leading role in nominating passenger
representatives for the new board. However, we
appreciate that any arrangement would have to be
designed to ensure that Passenger Focus’ much valued
independence was not compromised in any way.

The management board would have the freedom to run
Network Rail within the overall direction and policies
agreed by the supervisory board. The management board
would be accountable to the supervisory board for
performance. Network Rail’s executive directors would
attend the supervisory board providing a firm link to the
management board. Non-executive directors will be
retained on the management board.
The smaller more streamlined structure we propose will
mean that the supervisory board will have a much more
active role than the current membership body and will
meet more frequently. The supervisory board will have
audit functions, including oversight of the remuneration
of the CEO of Network Rail (including bonuses) and the
power to approve or remove the executive directors. A
supervisory board will be in a much stronger position to
carry out such functions effectively and monitor the
performance of management than the membership body
that exists now. To ensure that the supervisory board has
the information it needs to carry out its duties effectively,
it should have access to independent research and
support, funded by Network Rail.

We believe that giving industry stakeholders greater
power over Network Rail’s priorities will:
• improve performance and ensure a stronger focus on
service quality, value for money, passenger concerns
and tackling overcrowding;
• reduce fragmentation of the railway; and
• produce better coordination and integration between
the management of track and trains.
Working with the regulator, we would seek bring these
governance changes into effect via an amendment to
Network Rail’s licence and constitutional documents.

Getting the best for Passengers 9

5. Long term strategy

5.1. High Speed Rail
So often in our nation’s history, new transport links have
helped push forward progress and prosperity. In the 19th
century it was the steam locomotive. In the 20th it was
our motorways and our airports. In the 21st we believe it
will be high speed rail.
Labour have failed to modernise our transport system for
the 21st century – roads are choked, trains are
overcrowded and pollution is rising. Inadequacies in our
transport system have also contributed to a North-South
divide in the economic health of our country.
The rest of Europe is moving ahead on high speed rail.
The opening of High Speed One, linking the Channel
Tunnel to St Pancras Station, was of course hugely
welcome. However, by 2020, this 68 mile stretch of high
speed track is likely to amount to only 0.007 per cent of
Europe’s total high speed rail network.13 By this time we
will have fallen well behind a number of countries in Asia
including, not only Japan and China, but also South Korea,
Taiwan and Vietnam.
The Government’s own transport advisor, Sir Rod
Eddington, has said there was a strong business case for
high speed rail,14 and international experience shows
major economic benefits.15 And yet the Government have
been lagging behind. Their 30 year strategy for rail, set
out in their White Paper of July 2007, had no place for
high speed rail. Ruth Kelly admitted in Summer 2008 that
not one civil servant was working on high speed rail.
Under pressure after Conservatives started setting the
pace on this issue, the Government’s response is more
empty words and two overlapping working groups.
A Conservative Government would take the decisions
that Labour seems so incapable of making. So we will
give the go ahead for a high speed line connecting Leeds,
Manchester, Birmingham and London. We see this as the
first step in a national high speed network which will see
our line extended to Newcastle and Scotland with further
new lines linking up major cities across the UK.

10 Getting the best for Passengers

With the West Coast Main Line expected to be full to
breaking point within the next decade,16 we face a
capacity time bomb that it will be increasingly difficult to
diffuse without a new line. Opting for high speed rail
would deliver dramatically improved journey times:17
Origin

Destination Current
HSR Improvement
Journey Journey
(mins)
Time
Time
(mins)
(mins)

London

Birmingham

80

45

35

London

Manchester

125

80

45

London

Leeds

125

97*

28

55

17*

38

Manchester Leeds

Our plan would also provide a major capacity uplift. It will
free up more space for commuter and stopping services
on the existing line, delivering significant benefits for
places such as Stafford, Lichfield, Macclesfield and Milton
Keynes. It would also mean more space for freight on the
existing line, helping reduce traffic congestion by taking
lorries off the roads.
As well as providing an attractive substitute for
thousands of car journeys on some of the most
congested motorways in the country, our proposal will
help bring about a more balanced economy. By shrinking
the distance between North and South we will help draw
the Midlands and the North into the same growth zone
as London and the South East, and at the same time
reduce the pressure on the south east economy and
infrastructure. The benefits of a full high speed network
could produce economic benefits of £63 billion across the
country over 60 years.18
We believe high speed rail is affordable. We have
conducted a detailed desktop feasibility study drawing
on exceptional work already conducted by leading
engineers such as Atkins. We have included the 66 per
cent optimism bias recommended by the Treasury. And
we have based our revenue projections on very cautious
assumptions on ticket prices which are highly
competitive with the price of the same journeys by air.
We see no point in building a high speed line that no one
can afford to use.

We are confident that the business case for the new line
is so strong that so long as the taxpayer meets the upfront cost of land and track, the expected returns would
mean that the private sector could meet the remainder of
the cost, and cover construction and operating risks. The
overall cost of the new line would be around £20 billion,
of which the contribution needed from the taxpayer
would be £15.7 billion, (both in today’s prices).
Building this line would require £1.3 billion from the
taxpayer (in today’s prices) each year during the 12 year
period that the rail professionals tell us construction
would take. Since the planning and preparation process
would take at least 4 to 5 years, we would target
construction to begin in 2015 and run to 2027.
Good connections to major airports could also
significantly enhance the benefits of high speed rail. So a
Conservative Government will support proposals along
the lines of the plan put forward by engineering firm,
Arup, for a new Heathrow rail hub. This would link
Heathrow terminals directly into the main rail network
and the lines to Reading, Oxford, Bristol, Plymouth,
Cardiff, Swansea, Cheltenham and Southampton, greatly
improving public transport links to the airport.
The plan would also include construction of a new high
speed link connecting Heathrow airport to the Channel
Tunnel Rail link and the new route north, providing a
viable alternative to thousands of short haul flights now
clogging up the airport. By freeing up landing slots, our
proposal would help tackle overcrowding problems and
allow more space for long haul flights, making Heathrow
a much better airport, but without the environmental
damage that would be caused by a third runway.
This is a long term project, but one which we are
determined to deliver. We believe this will be the vital first
step in building a countrywide network in the UK so that
we can finally start catching up with the high speed rail
revolution that has transformed travel in so much of
Europe.

5.2. No more Whitehall meddling
It is clear that Government interference in the way the
railways are run is now hindering the ability of rail
professionals to deliver the capacity improvements their
customers want.
Over a decade after privatisation, it is time to trust the
railway industry with more freedom over the operational
decisions involved in running the railway. The focus of
the Government should be on protecting passengers’
interests, ensuring value for money for the taxpayer and
providing an overall strategic direction for the railways not with deciding whether the 09.09 from Reading can
stop at Slough or not.
We want to see the end of the absurd practice of civil
servants setting detailed timetables across the network.
Timetabling should normally be the preserve of train
operators and Network Rail. If, exceptionally, they cannot
agree, the rail regulator should arbitrate. The DfT’s role
should be radically stripped back, with officials retaining
only a limited involvement, focused on overall strategy
decisions; for example, where timetabling has an impact
on the long term planning and coordination of large
engineering projects on the network or will play a
significant role in determining how the benefits of
capacity upgrades will be allocated between industry
players.
The Government’s role in buying rolling stock should also
be radically scaled back. It makes no sense for civil
servants in Whitehall to take the detailed day-to-day
decisions on new rolling stock which they now do. This
degree of detailed involvement is now slowing up
delivery of new capacity and driving up costs for both the
taxpayer and the farepayer.
So long as the interests of the taxpayer are safeguarded,
rail professionals should have much more freedom to
take the decisions on rolling stock that they believe will
work best for their business and their passengers.
And franchise agreements should be more flexible and

Getting the best for Passengers 11

less prescriptive, allowing more decisions in the rail
industry to be taken by rail professionals, subject to the
oversight of a powerful consumer-facing regulator (see
above). This should improve the ability of the rail industry
to react to current capacity needs, plan for the future and
deliver value for money for the farepayer.
These reforms will reverse the trends of the Government’s
2005 Railways Act which brought many key operational
decision making – such as specifications for trains and
some services – into the Department for Transport.

5.3. Better cooperation and integration
between track and train
In our extensive discussions with rail stakeholders,
almost all sectors supported the need for greater
integration and cooperation between the management of
track and train as a way to improve services for
passengers. Our reforms are designed to achieve that but
without radical structural change. After a series of
upheavals over the last 15 years, we believe there is little
appetite for yet another major structural shake-up across
the network.
Network Rail and companies who operate passenger and
freight services need to co-operate more closely – not just
on capacity enhancements, but also on the day-to-day
management of the railways. They need to focus their
efforts on the concerns of the customer and work
together to improve punctuality and customer service on
the railways.
Passenger and freight operators have a more on-theground, day-to-day relationship with their customers. And
passengers currently use operators as their main focus
for comments and complaints on the rail industry. So we
want operators to have a greater say than they have
currently in the decisions made on our railways. We
believe that this will help focus cross industry priorities
on the concerns of customers – the passengers and
freight customers who use the railways.
This will not only help improve the day-to-day running of

12 Getting the best for Passengers

the railways but also create a much stronger industry
focus on tackling overcrowding, improving customer
service and getting value for money. This should help
take the pressure off fares during these difficult economic
times, as well improving efficiency and reliability. And,
most important of all, it should help us deliver the new
rail capacity passengers need.
So we will take a number of steps to achieve our goal of
better integration and coordination between the
management of track and train.
Improved transparency and a duty to cooperate
Firstly, we would work with the ORR to amend the
licences issued by the regulator so they place stronger
obligations on Network Rail to keep passenger and
freight operators informed of issues affecting the efficient
running of services such as the progress of engineering
work, and the likelihood of over-runs. A key problem with
the New Year 2008 over-runs was the short notice given
to train operators that the track would not reopen on
time. For example, National Express was given only a few
hours notice that Liverpool Street would not reopen on
time after the New Year break. This made it more difficult
for them to take action to deal with the situation and
minimise problems for their passengers.
We will strengthen and extend the duties imposed on
Network Rail to co-operate with train and freight
operators. We will place a clear and explicit duty on
Network Rail to cooperate with train operators on
passenger
satisfaction,
capacity
improvements,
overcrowding, growing passenger numbers and planning
major upgrade projects.
We would like to see the ORR take a pro-active role in
enforcing these elements of the licences they grant to the
rail industry, bringing the parties together to resolve
differences where necessary.
A refocused Network Rail
However, imposing a duty to cooperate will not be
sufficient, on its own, to generate the improvements we
want to achieve. We also need to put the right incentives

in place to achieve real change. We also need to the
address the fact that Network Rail’s status as a company
limited by guarantee, means that it does not face the same
financial incentive to respond to customer concerns that a
private company does.
We believe that one of the goals of the regulatory system
should be to seek to replicate a normal supplier/customer
relationship between Network Rail and the providers of
train services - passenger, freight and Open Access
operators. Part of our reform programme is aimed at
confirming that Network Rail’s role is as a supplier of
infrastructure services to its customers rather than a body
which controls the whole system.
We will therefore work with the ORR to ensure that the
targets and requirements set by the regulator are
demanding and match the concerns of operators and
passengers as closely as possible. We would give stronger
remedies to passenger operators and make it easier to
seek redress from the regulator should Network Rail fail to
live up to its obligations to maintain and update the
railway.19
We believe that our proposals for instituting a supervisory
board will also help in this context by making Network Rail
more accountable to its customers. The governance
changes we envisage will promote better integration of
track and train by giving operating companies a stronger
voice in how Network Rail is run and what its priorities are.
Developing common goals across the rail industry
Introducing a more harmonised and coherent regulatory
structure (as set out above) should help the industry
develop common goals. There is no doubt that in the rail
context, worthwhile objectives can often conflict or pull
in different directions: for example, on track engineering
works, simple cost considerations would favour day-time
closures, whereas passenger convenience makes night
working preferable. Having the same body to reconcile
and balance these different issues rather than the ORR
and DfT addressing separate concerns with their separate
responsibilities to oversee Network Rail and the train
operators will help reduce friction between the different

sides of the rail industry.
Over time, we want to see a more collaborative and
integrated industry taking a greater role in developing
strategy for the future of the railways. Policy objectives
and funding limits will, of course, always rest with the
Government, but ministers will make better decisions if
guided by a whole-industry strategy. This is in line with
recent comments made by the Chairman of ORR, Chris
Bolt, that the industry ‘lacks a clear vision’ of how it will
meet the UK’s transport and economic development
needs.20
Encouraging co-operative working practices
We would encourage cooperative working practices
between Network Rail and the train operators. These are
not matters where we would seek to mandate the changes
we set out but we see them as an important way forward
in improving efficiency and customer service on the
railways and we encourage stakeholders to adopt them.
We recognise that some welcome progress has been made
in this area, for example with the establishment of
Integrated Control Centres (ICCs)21 across much of the
network where teams from Network Rail, and local
passenger and freight operators work together under one
roof. These centres can improve cooperation between
Network Rail and the train operators on the operational
control of the network and allow for faster and more
efficient reactions to events or problems on the lines.
However, there is still more that could be done to spread
best practice so that the different teams in each ICC are
genuinely integrated rather than simply located in the
same premises.
In addition, we would encourage the adoption of a more
decentralised management structure at Network Rail with
greater responsibility given to regional teams. We believe
that decentralisation would enable Network Rail teams to
work more closely with the passenger and freight
operators running services in their area. The Scottish
example shows that this type of internal devolution within
Network Rail can work well without causing disruption or
unnecessary fragmentation. It can also provide a valuable

Getting the best for Passengers 13

internal benchmark for Network Rail management and the
ORR in evaluating cost effectiveness, best working
practices and value for money.
We also believe that establishing a regular forum attended
by key decision-makers in Network Rail’s regional team
and the operators of open access, freight and passenger
services in the relevant area could also promote
partnership working and help coordinate work on issues
such as customer service, passenger feedback,
performance improvement, project delivery, safety issues
and punctuality. We considered carefully whether such
arrangements necessitated new legal structures but prefer
the less formal approach of the “virtual regional boards”
advocated by the former chairman of the Railway Forum,
Chris Green, in his paper Network Rail: What Strategy for
Success?
In the longer term, we would also be prepared to consider
Chris Green’s further suggestion of seeking to align the
franchise areas more closely with Network Rail’s nine
regions to further facilitate close cooperation between
devolved Network Rail teams and the local passenger and
freight operators.
Innovation: piloting other models of integration
In 2004 Merseytravel, the Passenger Transport Executive
for Merseyside, put forward a proposal for what they called
“Full Local Decision-Making” for the Merseyrail franchise in
the Liverpool area. The plan would have seen the track in
the area covered by the franchise leased to Merseyrail by
Network Rail, with the train operator taking over
responsibility for running the track as well as the trains.
Merseytravel believe that this scheme would have led to
cost savings and improved levels of reliability. We want
to establish whether this would be the case. We also
believe that a pilot scheme of this sort would provide a
valuable benchmark against which we could assess the
costs and performance of Network Rail.
In government, we would encourage Merseytravel to
resubmit their proposal so that we can consider a pilot
scheme for full integration of track and train on the

14 Getting the best for Passengers

Merseyrail network. There are a number of reasons why
we believe that this is a scheme worth trying.
The system involved is a relatively self-contained part of
the network. This means that local concerns and priorities
may often be different from those of Network Rail with
its nationwide responsibilities, so the local operator may
be better placed to understand and react to local needs
quickly and efficiently. The risk that allowing another
operator to run the track might make Network Rail’s job
on the rest of the network more difficult is also minimised
where the project takes place in a relatively self contained
part of the network.
That Merseyrail has a long franchise, an established track
record in the rail industry and works closely with the local
passenger transport executive are also good reasons for
choosing this part of the network for a project to try out
new ways of working.
We will consult widely with a range of parties including
Network Rail, Merseyrail, Merseytravel and the regulator,
about the best way to put this into practice and over what
period. The project would be monitored and reviewed at
regular intervals to see if it is delivering benefits for
passengers. The arrangement would be subject to full
safety measures throughout its duration and subject to
the same rules that apply to the rest of the network.
Although Merseyrail looks to us to be a sensible choice
for this pilot scheme, if others elsewhere on the network
wished to be considered as an alternative we would be
happy to look at their proposals. We also propose to run
a second project along similar lines on another part of the
network.
We should make it clear that, successful or not, we do not
see this initiative as signalling an inevitable destination
of travel for the whole network. We would embark on the
project without ideological preconceptions and would
assess its results in a pragmatic way.

5.4. Longer, better franchises
The current system of short franchises of around seven
years discourages private sector investment. Operators
are unwilling to commit their own money if they are
unlikely to get a return on their investment before their
franchise ends. Put simply, short franchises stifle
investment and innovation.
Chiltern Railways provide an example of how things can
be done better. This franchise was let on a rolling basis
for 20 years which allowed Chiltern to make considerable
and imaginative investments in long term improvements,
working closely with Railtrack and then Network Rail. For
example, Chiltern has invested in new trains, extra car
parking places and new buildings. Were they to lose their
franchise they would still hold equity in these assets.
We propose franchises across the network should
generally be let for 15 to 20 years.22 We will also look at
ways to streamline the provisions to enable passenger
operators to retain or receive value for their investments
at the end of the franchise.23
And when we award franchises we will place real
importance on the quality the plans each bid contains to
invest in rail improvements, to increase capacity and
attract more passengers. Our assessment of franchise
bids will be qualitative not just quantitative. In granting
franchises, the current government has focused almost
solely on cost and how much money they can persuade
train operators to squeeze out of passengers. For us, cost
will not be the only consideration.
As set out above (in paragraph 4.2), we will also move to
more flexible and less prescriptive franchises giving
operators great scope for innovation and enterprise.
These changes will give the train operators a much
stronger incentive to invest to improve the quality of
service they offer and to provide new capacity to help
tackle overcrowding. We believe that our new approach
will help deliver a range of important improvements
including longer platforms, better station facilities and

more parking (both for cars and bicycles). It may also
become a realistic option for passenger operators to save
money by buying their own rolling stock rather than
leasing it.
With longer, more flexible franchises, we will take steps
to ensure the interests of passengers are safeguarded. We
would ensure that regular performance reviews would be
carried out by the rail regulator to ensure that train
operators continue to perform to an appropriate
standard. The regulator will be given powers to take
action against operators who fail their customers. Break
clauses would be written into the franchises to allow for
franchises to be removed from a TOC which consistently
fails its passengers.24

5.5. Innovation
improvements

in

delivering

rail

A concern repeated to us time and again is that Network
Rail’s bureaucratic culture can often prevent train
operators from improving stations and delivering much
needed capacity improvements such as longer platforms.
Another recurring concern is that Network Rail is not
sufficiently interested in allowing those in charge of ports,
factories and industrial estates to build short track
extensions to allow them to transport their goods by rail
instead of truck. This may, in part, be caused by Network
Rail’s need to focus on big challenges that come with
delivering major upgrade projects, but that does not
negate the need to address the problem.
We believe that contracts and funding for smaller scale
capacity enhancements, currently dealt with by Network
Rail, should be opened up to other providers, including
the passenger and freight operators whose businesses
are likely to benefit from the capacity enhancement.
We would encourage rail franchise bids to contain
proposals for this type of project. And joint bids for
funding by Network Rail and the local passenger and
freight operators would also be welcomed.
Other entities who might wish to bid would include

Getting the best for Passengers 15

Community Rail Partnerships, Passenger Transport
Executives and other local authorities.
We believe that making more work on the railways
contestable in this way would have a number of
advantages:
• It would speed up the construction of capacity
enhancements, improve efficiency and reduce costs
while leaving the bulk of Network Rail’s current
functions unchanged;
• It would provide useful benchmarks against which to
measure the performance of Network Rail and
encourage them to make more imaginative, cost
effective and capacity enhancing bids;
• It would encourage passenger and freight operators to
invest in important capacity enhancements that will
improve service to their customers.
This has worked before. For example, the train operator,
Chiltern, were granted permission from Network Rail to
design, finance and build station, signalling and track
improvements on their line coming into London
(Evergreen 1 and 2). Once the project was completed, the
line was transferred back to Network Rail but the
enhancements allowed Chiltern to run newer trains and
faster services on this track.25
A second example is found north of the border. In 2006,
Transport Scotland opened up £20 million from existing
rail budgets to bids from both Network Rail and the
Scottish TOCs for small scale enhancements. At the end
of the bidding process, £19 million of the £20 million
available was allocated directly to the passenger
operators because their bids were judged to be better
than Network Rail’s.
Competitive tendering would also encourage more track
to be built for freight. For example, freight operators
could bid for short rail extensions into ports, factories or
industrial estates. This will not only have a positive effect
on their business but would also encourage use of rail

16 Getting the best for Passengers

freight as a greener alternative to road freight.
It is likely that any new track would eventually be bought
by Network Rail (as happens now) and appropriate
provisions on this would be set out in the original
contracts for the works. In some cases, it may be that
freight companies could keep the track they built, but
they would still be subject open access rules.
We believe that these changes would stimulate Network
Rail through competition without risking further
fragmentation of the way the railways are run. This
reform would not have an impact on Network Rail’s lead
role in major upgrade projects or their functions of
maintaining and improving the core infrastructure of the
network and delivering a safe and reliable railway in the
most efficient manner possible.
This reform will not work unless Network Rail cooperates
fully with the people who bid successfully for these
projects. A frequent complaint from operators is that
Network Rail is not cooperative when they seek to carry
out work on stations or other upgrades. It is even alleged
some of the company’s staff have actually been
obstructive. We will amend Network Rail’s licence to
include a specific duty to cooperate with operators and
other entities carrying out these sorts of capacity
enhancements. We would expect the regulator to enforce
this duty proactively and to intervene to resolve disputes
promptly if problems arise and impose penalties for
failure to cooperate.
We would also encourage Network Rail to create a team
specifically tasked with working with other operators on
these smaller scale capacity enhancements. The team
would not be linked to a specific route or line. Its remit
would cover the whole network and it would advise
and/or carry out any significant engineering work needed
from Network Rail side in relation to the projects
undertaken by other providers. We would expect the ORR
to include the success or otherwise of this team as an
important part of assessing the performance of Network
Rail as a whole.

We believe that this element of our reforms should not
only help tackle capacity problems but also improve
passenger satisfaction, since these smaller schemes can
often yield disproportionately high returns in terms of
customer service.

5.6. Promoting Rail Freight
In recent years, our roads have become more and more
congested, with motorways representing 1 per cent of
road infrastructure but carrying 40 per cent of traffic. We
want to see rail freight become an increasingly attractive
alternative to road haulage. Key factors in determining the
competitiveness of rail freight include convenience and
accessibility of rail hubs, reliability of service, and cost.
Rail freight is a vital part of the UK supply chain. It plays a
very important role in tackling climate change and
congestion by getting trucks and bulk goods off our overstretched road network. According the Freight Transport
Association, one freight train can take 50 lorries off the
road.
As with passenger rail, the longevity of freight assets
mean that certainty and stability in policy-making is vitally
important. That is one of the reasons why these reform
ideas seek to avoid radical structural change and build on
what has gone right over the years since privatisation.
A competitive freight sector also needs an environment
that strikes the right balance between the needs of freight
and passengers. The one should not be allowed to crowd
out the other.

making Network Rail more efficient and more responsive
to its customers should help tackle the key concerns of
freight operators and improve the efficiency and
attractiveness of rail freight in the UK. The overall goal of
our reforms - to help deliver extra capacity and better
value for money - is just as much a concern for freight
customers as for passengers. Our proposals would also
give freight operators a stronger voice in the railway
network, allowing them to get a better deal from Network
Rail.
We very much hope to see freight companies using the
powers we will make available to bid for funding for
smaller scale capacity enhancements, for example by
working with Network Rail to add small-scale bespoke
freight lines to the network. We also envisage an increased
role for private sector funding in this area and would seek
to see bids from freight companies that include matched
funds from private sector investors.
Network Rail has an obligation to serve freight as well as
passengers. All too often it has failed to deliver. In
2006/07 Network Rail delays to freight traffic hit record
levels with 6.46 delays per 100 train km.26 It continued to
under-perform in this area in 2007/08, missing its
obligations to rail freight industry by an average of 13 per
cent.27 This means that goods do not get delivered on time
which means lost business. Working with the regulator,
we will seek to amend Network Rail’s licence to include
the obligation to support a growth in freight traffic.

And if rail freight is to be competitive and to fulfil its full
potential in our efforts to get carbon emissions down, we
need to find a way to provide extra freight capacity in our
rail network and relieve congestion at the most notorious
bottlenecks. That could involve improving a junction or
building an extra loop; or even larger scale upgrades such
as reopening old lines.
Increasing rail freight use is an important goal for us. We
believe that the changes set out in this review aimed at

Getting the best for Passengers 17

5.7.Community Rail

5.8. Open Access

When in government we will support and promote
Community Rail projects and we would encourage
Network Rail to do the same. We welcome the innovation
these projects so often involve. Community Rail schemes
are designed to involve local people in the development
and running of local and rural routes, services and
stations. They are often supported by Community Rail
Partnerships (CRP), comprising both the railway operator
and local councils, or by Rail User Groups (RUG).
Community railways are managed to fit local
circumstances, facing the challenge of increasing revenue,
reducing costs and increasing community involvement.

We value the role that open access operators play in
providing a competitive and a complementary service to
franchised operators. They play a fundamental role in
ensuring that bespoke and niche routes on the network
are nurtured and maintained.

Community Rail Partnerships have the potential to play a
pivotal role in efforts to re-open much missed local lines.
Although we do not underestimate the challenges (or
costs) of re-opening lines that have been closed for many
years, the renaissance of rail travel since privatisation and
the continuing growth expected in the next decade mean
it is now practical to re-evaluate some of the closures of
the past. New housing also has the potential to transform
the economic viability of disused lines, particularly where
developers are asked to make a contribution to funding
the public transport infrastructure needed to support new
homes.
We will introduce a moratorium on building on any
disused rail paths still in public ownership. This will last
for the whole of our first term in office. These corridors
are a precious transport resource and once built on, they
are lost forever. Not only will our moratorium keep alive
the option of re-opening old lines, in the interim period,
these corridors can provide excellent walking and cycle
paths.

18 Getting the best for Passengers

A Conservative Government would encourage and
promote open access. The reforms in our paper will
ensure that the people who run passenger train services,
including open access operators, have a stronger say in
how our railways are run, so that they have more freedom
to deliver what their passengers want. For a start, that
means less Whitehall meddling and closer working
practices between Network Rail and open access
operators. Our reforms also give open access operators a
stronger voice in the governance of Network Rail and in
setting the priorities and strategy for the company.

1 28 billion passenger kilometres were travelled in 1994/95, and 42 billion in
2004/05. Network Rail, Business Plan 2006, p.11
2 FOI request on the twenty most overcrowded trains for which complete data is
available (2007), published on DfT website 1 August 2008
3Network Rail, Business Plan, 2006, p.11
4 The Transport Select Committee’s latest report on rail has highlighted concerns
from within the industry from firms as varied as Bombardier Trains, Passenger
Focus, Virgin Trains, and The Campaign for Better Transport. Virgin Trains’
submission to the Transport Select Committee states that they are currently
achieving twice the Government’s estimate of the rate of real growth per annum
(Transport Select Committee, Delivering a sustainable railway: a 30-year strategy
for the railways?, 16 July 2008, p. 26)
5 National Passenger Surveys from Autumn 2005 to Autumn 2008 conducted by
Passenger Focus
6 Figures derived from the Association of Train Operating Companies Press
Releases: ‘ATOC Outlines Rail Fare Rises’, 8 December 2003; ‘ATOC Outlines Rail
Fare Rises’, 1 December 2004; ‘ATOC Announces 2006 Rail Fares’, 8 December
2005; ‘ATOC Announces 2007 Rail Fares’, 28 November 2006; ‘ATOC Announces
2008 Rail fares changes’, 28 November 2007
7 The Times, 29 June 2007
8 FOI request on twenty most overcrowded trains, ibid.
9 Passenger Focus Press Release, ‘South West Trains Passengers face up to 20 per
cent increase in rail fares from today’, 20 May 2007
10 Hansard, 17 July 2007, Col. 149: Mrs. Theresa Villiers: Will the Minister tell
us what representations he received from South West Trains about the impact on
fares when the DFT set the franchise premium payments up to 2014? Mr. Harris:
South West Trains made the Department aware that some off-peak, unregulated
fares would have a higher than inflation increase
11 At today’s prices
12 DfT, Annual Report, 2007. p.91: DfT, Annual Report 2008, p. 79
13 Competition Commission, Rolling Stock Leasing Market Investigation:
Provisional Findings, 7 August 2008
14 www.railteam.co.uk
15 Transport Select Committee, Minutes of Evidence, 16 April 2007, Q:64
16 See Steer Davies Gleave, High-speed Rail: International comparisons, 2004
17 Audit Office, The Modernisation of the West Coast Main Line, November 2006;
DfT, Towards a Sustainable Transport System, October 2007; Atkins, Because
Transport Matters, March 2008
18 Atkins, High-speed Line Study: Summary Report, 2004; Greengauge 21; *time

for Leeds calculated as average of London-Birmingham and London-Manchester
times
19Atkins, Because Transport Matters: High Speed Rail, 2008, p. 7
20 We will amend the current system of Joint Improvement Plans (JPIPs) to include
Local Process Commitments (LPCs) as part of the Network Code. These will work
similarly to the former Local Output Commitments (LOCs) – in so far as giving a
clear route for operators to seek redress when Network Rail underperforms.
However, we acknowledge that LOCs were not without their drawbacks so we
would reform and streamline the way they operated in our proposed new LPC. We
are keen to consult widely with the industry to ensure our reforms on this point
provide workable solutions to help improve efficiency and passenger service on
the railways.
21 The Telegraph, 19 June 2008
22 ICCs are currently funded partly by the TOCs and partly by Network Rail.
Should more ICCs be introduced, the Network Rail share of the costs would need
to come out of existing resources, rather than require additional funds from the
taxpayer. Since the relevant functions performed are already carried out by
Network Rail regional teams, this would involve redeployment of existing
resources and personnel rather then significant new projects.
23 These changes would only come into effect on a change of franchise. We do
not propose to interrupt or amending existing franchises, although we would be
open to negotiation should existing franchisees wish to surrender their franchise
and seek to be considered for a longer one.
24 This would not result in the loss of any existing national asset on the rail
network since it would apply to new assets or improvements rather than to
existing property.
25 We would not want the break clauses to be so onerous as to undermine the
certainty provided by longer franchises. There is a balance to get right here, when
it comes to the interest of passengers. On the one hand, it is in the passenger’s
interest to secure long term private sector investment in improving the railways.
On the other, we need to ensure there are effective means of redress against
franchise holders who under-perform. We are confident we can get the balance
right between these two competing concerns.
26 However, it is important to note that the SRA underwrote the whole of the
Evergreen project and negotiated Network Rail’s surrender of part of the network
whilst Network Rail were still very young with untested powers.
27 Presentation published by Bill Emery of the ORR

Getting the best for Passengers 19

Promoted by Alan Mabbutt on behalf of the Conservative Party both of 30 Millbank, London SW1P 4DP
& printed by TPF Group, Lexicon House, Midleton Road, Guildford, Surrey GU2 8XP

